This is Jockel Podcast number 22 with echo Charles and me, Jockel Willink. Good evening, echo. Good evening.
Someone called for my Afghan interpreter, Rockman. A good man with whom we had worked with for some time.
These interpreters are the unsung heroes of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
They often suffer threats and ostracism for their willingness to endure the battlefield alongside us.
Their motivation isn't money. There's enough money to make it worthwhile facing down in surgeons who know where you and your family live.
They are idealists. They work and risk death because they believe in our common cause of freedom.
Rockman responded to the call immediately. Running before me, his foot fell in a particular spot just to feet away from where I stood.
I was looking right at him.
As I later discovered, he instantly lost all his limbs in the explosion.
Even though I was staring right at him, I never actually saw it happen. My experience was a series of tremendous blows and subsequent realizations.
A train hit me. Ears ringing. What the fuck was that?
Darkness. Something is wrong. Got hit. My legs reached out and see if they're still there. They're there. I feel them.
I'm saying everywhere. Mostly my abdomen. Something shot through it. I think my eyes must be kicked with mud. I can barely see anything.
I hear groaning and screaming. Someone hit an IED. Pain everywhere. But my eyes.
I crawl around a little bit. Mostly to see if my body still functions. My teammates make their way to me.
I ask someone to pour water on my eyes to remove the dirt so I can see that doesn't work.
I can only see light and some shapes must be a lot of dirt. I recognize my corpsman's voice as he works on my wounds.
I say, dude, don't get blown up. It sucks. He laughs and tells me to shut up.
I was conscious throughout. Our corpsman stopped my bleeding. The worst of which was from my knees and wrapped up my eyes.
It still did not occur to me that there was anything wrong with them. I could only hear the situation around me.
My teammates calling to each other, communicating the situation with tense voices.
I later found out that a foot wearing the typical Solomon boot that we all wore hit one of my teammates in the chest about 50 yards away.
Rockman was groaning in pain. Deep, deep pain.
Most people's experience of combat wounds is from the movies. The soldier gets hit. His gut spilling out and he looks down at them screaming in horror.
But this is not the way it is. In reality, truly bad injuries, sap your energy and prevent you from screaming.
Instead, the sound of wounded man makes is a much deeper, more visceral emanating from the depths of his being.
It's a grown, a cry, a moaning that wreaks of utter desperation.
It is far worse than a scream. It is true pain manifested in the sound.
This was the sound that Rockman made. It is unforgettable.
As the corn intended to me and we waited for the MetaVac helicopter, a fought entered my head.
We may be in a firefight any second now. Rockman was barely alive and he would later die in the hospital.
Our EOD chief petty officer took a little frag also and would be evacuated with us. All hands were needed to fight.
I could hear the MetaVac helo coming in low. This was no time to ask someone to carry me.
Blow up and blind. I stood up and walked myself to it.
Dave Worson, who would be killed two months later, heroically laid down cover fire for me as I boarded the helo.
It was my last memory of him.
MetaVac's on board the helo copter took one look at me, laid me down and eased me into unconsciousness.
I woke up days later, far away from Hellman, far away from Candeharr, far away from my brothers and arms, far away from the war and dust of Central Asia.
I was brought back into consciousness in Germany at the American Hospital Longstool.
A breathing tube was being unceremoniously ripped from my throat, rather unpleasant.
I opened my eyes or thought I did and saw nothing.
A physician came to me and told me the truth. My right eye was gone.
My left eye was so heavily damaged that there was virtually no chance I would see with it again.
My future was a future of blindness, of darkness, of no sight, no color, no visual beauty.
I would never see a sunset, a friend, a loved one again.
In one instant, in a fatal footfall, all that was ripped away.
And that right there was an excerpt from a book called Fortitude, written by Dan Krenchall,
who was a former seal officer and he's actually been on this podcast before number 118.
And the last time he was on, he was in the process of running for Congress.
Well, he won and is currently a congressman serving the second congressional district of Texas,
and the House of Representatives, and well, it's an honor to have Dan back with us today
to share some of the lessons learned that he talks about in his new book.
And once again, the name of the book is Fortitude. Dan.
Thanks for coming back, Dan.
Thank you for having me.
Listen to you read that.
Maybe I should have asked you to read my book for the audio version.
That was good.
Well, thanks.
It's only good because the story that's being told is obviously a very powerful one.
And you know, you sent me this book.
And as soon as you sent it to me, I started talking to you about, let's get you back on the podcast.
Obviously you're busy man.
Obviously you're busy man right now for reference.
It is, what is it?
It's March of 2020 in the midst of the pandemic.
The coronavirus pandemic is going on around the world and around America.
There's schools and again, who knows what this will look like,
looking back on it when people are listening to this in the future.
Whether if they're listening to it a month from now, a week from now or years from now,
it'll be interesting what this pandemic turned out to be.
But you braved the travel.
We did.
And we just, you know, I'm leaving off the heels of that late night vote again for,
for listeners trying to put this in context and what you saw in the news.
Leaving off the heels of that late night vote where,
where, which was for the economic stimulus that the president supported
and bipartisan in nature, different from the eight billion plus dollars that we voted on a week prior,
which was meant to combat it on a public health scale.
So, you know, I, I, the, it's,
everybody agrees.
I think we've, as a country and as a government, we have taken this particular pandemic more seriously than anything in the past.
More than we did for Ebola, for H1N1.
And I've asked that specific questions to folks like the Assistant Surgeon General Admiral Red,
who, who, who, who worked all of these pandemics.
And so, I just hope people realize that that's not what you hear from the media.
You know, the media would tell you that it's totally unprepared.
And, you know, you're never going to be perfectly prepared.
I think that's a lesson, you and I know pretty well.
But you learn those lessons and you do better the next time.
The finger pointing has been completely unnecessary, mostly dishonest and totally unhelpful.
But the government has been taken it pretty seriously and we're definitely taking it seriously in Congress.
Well, I'm glad you were able to get out here.
And again, I think there's no telling what this will look like in hindsight.
But it's quiet around here in San Diego right now.
There's just not a lot of people doing a lot of stuff. Obviously we're in the gym and the gym,
you know, not a lot of ton of people coming into the gym right now.
There's still people training though.
Don't worry, we're training that you did, too.
But yeah, you sent me the book and, you know, cracked it open, started reading it and immediately was just, you know, getting in touch with you to see if we could get you out here.
On the podcast to talk about it and man, you know, the stuff that you've been through and the lessons that you've taken away from it are very powerful.
And you know, that's one of the things that struck me out of the gate is that when you got wounded, you actually, you actually do strength from very powerful place and things that you've been through.
And I want to jump in and read some more of this, some more of this things that you've been through.
And I think a lot of people are going to be able to take a lot of away from it.
So I'm going back to the book.
This is after you wounded.
I fought back to another time in my life two decades earlier.
The first time I ever witnessed the kind of inescapable pain that I was feeling now and the grit to overcome it was with my mother.
She fought a battle so many other modern women fight breast cancer.
And she did so with endurance, grace and optimism.
Her example is never left me and it wasn't about to let some cheap ass ID in the ancient killing fields of Afghanistan render me unworthy of her memory.
She was only 35 years old when she was diagnosed.
Same age as me as I write these words.
When she got the news, it was one day before my little brothers first birthday.
I was five years old.
The doctors told her she might have five years to live.
And they were right.
Soon after she would be feeling the pain I was feeling now as the cancer and chemotherapy ripped apart her body in battle.
She fought it for five years.
And when I was 10, she died.
If you've ever cared for loved one in terminal decline, you know what that's like.
There is an intensity of loss that is immeasurable.
Words don't do it justice.
The whole deep down in your gut feels like it will never go away.
As a child, the intensity of the experience is made worse as grief is amplified by in comprehension.
Going from kindergarten to fourth grade, knowing that your mother is dying.
That the center of a small boy's world is collapsing is an experience I wouldn't wish on anyone.
But from this grief came learning.
I got to experience the nature of a true hero.
And the example she set was the most powerful fortifying and selfless thing I have ever seen, including combat.
Buying helpless and a hospital bed, I had to wonder whether my mother had asked the same desperate question I was currently asking.
What I ever seen, my family again.
I figured that as she could suffer through that question and the unknowable answer, so could I.
My mother spent half a decade staring death in the face, burned with caring for two small boys whom she would not live to see grow up.
She lived day to day in ever increasing pain, the cancer afflicted her.
And the cancer treatments afflicted her too.
Six rounds of chemotherapy on top of radiation treatments are a brutal experience for even the strongest constitution.
Self pity is never a useful state.
But if anyone had reason to feel sorry for herself and had to complain a bit, it was my mom.
But she never did.
In terminal decline and in pain across five years, I never heard her complain once.
I never heard her bemoan her fate.
I never saw her express self pity.
Every day she woke up was a day she was still alive and she lived.
She was dying and she was grateful to not be dead yet.
Every extra day was a gift where she could look her boys in the face.
Every next evening was another night she could tell us she loved us before bed.
Even during her last days when the hospital delivered her death bed and hospice nurse to our dining room.
Her demeanor did not change.
Susan Carroll Crenshaw was exactly the opposite of what she had every right to be.
She was a very good person.
Yeah, yeah, it was more for my mom than for me.
You know, I tell that story because the name of that chapter is perspective from darkness.
And perspective, I think is something we lack in our modern day society.
We are, I think, too many people are willing to jump to this false conclusion that you've had at the worst that your life is worse than your ancestors or than your peers or than anybody else walking around America right now.
And there's just a really, just so happens, there's a really good chance that's not true.
I'm not saying it's not true.
I'm just saying there's a pretty good chance it's probably not true.
It's interesting, too.
Well, I always talk about perspective from a leadership perspective, which means, hey, if I'm looking at one of my troops,
the better I understand their perspective on what I'm telling them and what their job is and what the mission is,
the better I'm going to be able to lead them.
And same thing with my boss.
The better I understand my boss's perspective and what the strategy look like and what's the overall thing he's trying to get accomplished.
The better I understand his perspective, the better I'm going to be able to lead.
And it's interesting because when you put that across society, you would think that in today's day and age with the, with social media, with the ability to absorb so many other people's perspectives,
you'd think that that would open up your mind to realize that there's, you know, a lot of other people that have been through much worse than anything.
I've even been close to gone through.
Yeah.
And yet it doesn't seem to be happening that way.
No.
One of the most popular stories for an American to hear is a story of overcoming adversity.
And that's a good thing.
I'm glad those are still the stories that are the most popular in the American psyche.
You know, that a movie about somebody who's down-trodden and overcomes it is still a good movie.
But there is, it's undeniable that there is this fragility that is infecting America.
And that's why I wrote this book.
And it's, you know, it's not a political book, it's not a seal book, it's not a, it's a cultural book.
It's a cultural philosophy book and it's, it's simultaneously an individual kind of self-help book.
And just how to be mentally tougher in your own individual life.
But there are much broader cultural implications that are strewn throughout the book.
It is a, it is a culture book.
And because I fear that we are getting more sensitive, more prone to microaggressions and prone to saying how offended you are and
wearing, wearing that offense on your sleeve, proudly.
And, and this gets to the, I think, what's the next chapter, which is who is your hero?
And we've changed what we look up to.
Like we think that it's good to, to scream about how offended we are.
Like that's become like a monochrome, a good thing.
You know what's interesting, as, as, you know, before we start recording, you know,
we're just talking about kind of life in the games.
And, uh, if there's one thing that you never do in the teams, ever, is show anyone that you're offended by anything that you're saying to you because if you allow that to happen,
you know, you're just going to get torn apart.
Whereas it seems like, and I hadn't thought about from that perspective, the, the, all the rage in the public right now is if you can possibly get offended by something, then it's your, your, your, your,
your the best thing in the world, if you jump up and down and point to the person that offended you and why you were offended and,
and the more offended you are the better off.
The agree of a to victim status is supreme these days, and that's a, and that's more of a serious problem than then I think most Americans are giving it credit for it.
It's a really bad thing because you're changing, you're changing our heroes and, and when I say heroes, I want to, I want to be more specific because then I outlined this in the book and greater detail.
I don't mean like, Jaco is my hero.
Actually, and I personally when people ask me about who I look up to and my heroes, I, I will tell them attributes of people that I think are respectable.
I don't think you should have one person that you look up to and I don't think that's totally healthy and that's not what I'm talking about on the book.
I'm talking about hero archetypes.
You know, and an archetype is a, is a, is a broader set of ideas or attributes that we sort of, that we sort of recognize collectively.
Okay, so it's more of a psychological term than anything else.
And there are certain hero archetypes, you know, like, maybe seals have a hero archetype.
We write about that in our, in our seal ethos.
It's such a beautifully written ethos and I, and I, I have the entire thing written in the book because it perfectly demonstrates what we believe we should be.
Now what we should do, but what we should be, and that's a really interesting thing, and I, and I, and I note that,
you, you look at a, like, a corporate ethos, and if you go to people like corporations websites and you read them,
they're, they're usually something like, we want to be the number one manufacturer on the West Coast.
It's like, that's not who you want to be.
That's just something you want to do.
If you, if you write out an ethos of who you want to be, you can, you can reach that level of elitism.
You can surpass mediocrity.
So that's important. That's important thing is here's that we have societal hero archetypes that we look up to.
Jesus is a, is a hero archetype.
Superman is a hero archetype.
Real characters, too. You know, I put, I, I, I, I could name a thousand, you know, Rosa Parks, Ronald Reagan.
All of these people embody certain attributes that the American people think this is good.
Okay. And we did generally agree on these things.
I tell a whole story in the book about, when I was at Disney World, or was it Disney World?
And I, I was at the Star Wars land.
And I was watching this really cool thing happen where they, where they let these kids do Jedi training.
Mm-hmm.
And of course, like in, in typical Disney fashion, everything is really well run.
The actors are absolutely amazing.
And they're teaching these kids, you know, how to work their swords and all that.
But they're also teaching them really cool things like the, just little Jedi lessons.
Like, like, will you let your emotions be driven by hate and anger?
You know, like really simple lessons, because we look up to the Jedi as like a hero archetype.
And so there are certain things that are just viewed as good.
But that's changing.
And I, and I find that to be an extremely dangerous thing, because we're elevating the,
the, a grieved victim, the person who talks about being offended the most and who screams the loudest,
elevating that person to a higher level in our society.
And that's dangerous.
You're, you're flipping cultural norms on their head.
And you do that at your own peril, you know, and, you know, cultural foundations based in thousands of years of trial and error and wisdom.
Those are important.
They're more important than people realize.
And like, that's, that's, that's frankly what the first,
I guess, with that, that particular chapter is about perspectives chapter.
You know, they're all related, of course.
But the perspective's chapter and the reason I bring up my mom and the reason I tell that story.
And then subsequent stories of other guys that we've lost is because you, you,
you need to, it's healthy to go through life thinking, you know, what somebody has had it harder than me.
And I'd like to live up to their memory.
I'd like to live up to that hero attribute, the hero, or the hero archetype of my mother.
And I'm not lying. She never complained. She just, she never did.
And if she did, I didn't hear it as a kid.
And so, when you're living in blindness and not sure whether you will see again,
it's healthy to have that in your head.
And I'm, you know, I say, you don't have to, you don't have to experience a bomb in your face to get some perspective.
But you can read about it. And it's like you said earlier, in a world where we're so connected and we can see everybody else's story of hardship,
you would think that we would have more perspective.
But it seems that the opposite is true.
And for, for step to reversing that trend, I think, is to at least realize it.
Yeah, we, we recently had on, um,
rose-sindler who was, um, Auschwitz survivor. And I got many, many, many, um, messages and comments coming back saying, yeah, I'll put myself in check, you know, I, I don't have it that bad.
Um, so that, and you know, we've had many people on here that have been through some really hellacious things,
whether it's prison or war camps, some just devastating situations.
And it is, it's, it's, it's, it, if they weren't here and here, I, I get the feeling sometimes that if people weren't hearing it here, they wouldn't be hearing it.
They wouldn't be hearing it, you know, they'd just be thinking that everyone is living better than they are and they're the ones that are in the worst possible situation in the world.
We've got, yeah, and that's a, you know, I don't know, to, to get too much to politics, but it is, it is, it is one reason that we, that we have lurched into this conversation
about socialism because fundamentally socialism is, is an ideology that pits people against each other.
You have to believe that somebody else is oppressing you and that they have a better than you for you to embrace socialism.
It is, it is, it is, it is the ultimate sin manifested into a political ideology, not the ultimate sin, but it's one of them.
And that's, I was, I was looking for the deeper reason as to why something is happening. And it is natural for, for people to want to believe that something outside their own power is affecting their lives.
Because if it's you, if it's your fault, if it's you who has to step up, that's harder, it's much easier to believe that there's something else.
It also isn't a salt on your ego when you look at yourself and you say, well, I guess I'm the one that messed this up.
Yeah, it is, and that's a devastating psychological consequence when your ego is hurt that way.
It is.
Yeah, I wrote a book about that called Extreme Ownership.
Which is a good book.
Again, it's, it's one of those things where, you know, you wrote this book as, you know, as you're saying like a cultural philosophy, you know,
like, life and I wrote Extreme Ownership as, oh, as leadership principles, but I mean it didn't take, but two seconds for everyone to say, oh yeah, what you're talking about is, you know,
easily transforms into a, into a cultural philosophy of taking ownership and responsibility for what's going on in your world.
Absolutely, there's no doubt about it.
And you find yourself in the lot in light and look, do people get cancer?
Yes, people get cancer. Do, do horrible things happen to people to families? Yes, absolutely.
How do you respond to those things? Is the question, how do you take ownership of what you do next?
And, and that's the, that's the big difference. And if what you do next is, is, you know, say it's out of my control and I can't do anything and you're, get the mentality that you're a victim of what's happening around you.
That means you're not going to make any changes to transform your life and move in a more positive direction. It's just the way it is.
And, you know, I think, I think one of these things that happens with,
you know, these ideas behind socialism in America and again, it's, it's like crazy that we would be sitting here talking about this, anybody that,
anybody that reads anything about history knows that this is just not good, but, you know, it comes across always as,
Hey, well, what we want to do is help everyone out. That's what we want to do. We want to help everyone out.
And, okay, if that's like the core belief and this is where I think sometimes we could do better or, you know,
someone like myself could do a better job explaining to people, look, if you care about other human beings,
so much, if you want to help as many people as possible in this country, the best possible thing you could do is allow the market to flourish,
allow people to build businesses. That's what you, that's what changes people's lives, that's what helps not giving them a handout and making them reliable or a lot,
or a reliant on the state. It doesn't help anybody. It helps them for a week. You know, it helps them for that pay period,
but it doesn't help them transform their lives into something more positive.
One way I explain that exact sentiment is to ask someone to imagine how they would raise their kid if they love their kid.
You know, would you give them whatever they want? Would you, would you tell your kid that whatever they do wrong?
It's not their fault. Somebody else made them do it wrong. Would you tell them that there's no consequences for their actions?
Would you tell them that if they do an hour of chores and they're sibling those three hours of chores that they deserve the same reward?
Would you teach them any of these things? There is no liberal who would teach other kids these things? They don't.
Because they love their kids and they want their kids to be successful.
But that's effectively what we're teaching, what we're saying that we should teach our citizens.
And so I ask people why don't we treat our citizens the way we treat our kids as if we loved them?
Because that's true compassion. It doesn't mean we don't have a social safety net.
And that's always the counter argument. It's a disingenuous counter argument.
Well, the counter argument that is look with your kids.
And this is an example that I use when I especially when I'm talking to businesses. So I say listen, like what will be with a startup, right? That's grown from you know, they were ten people.
Then there are hundred people. Now they're getting to that threshold.
And I say listen at some point, you're going to have to put some discipline on what's going on inside your company.
You're going to have to have people come to work at a lined times.
You're going to have to have them eat lunch at certain times.
Right, not just one that you're going to have to have meetings that are scheduled. And look, when you've got a company of twelve people, you can get away with all that stuff.
And it's great. There's money coming in and everything's.
But as soon as you start to grow, well, you have to start to have discipline inside your organization.
Right. And so the example I give people is I say listen, have you ever met a kid that when he's born, look, when a child is born, you give whatever they want.
You've got to keep them alive, right? There's your social state like you have to give them food, water, milk. You have to get you have to feed them. You have to take care of them.
If you continue to do that when they're three, four, five.
Well, by the time they're ten, you actually now have Satan for a child because this kid is totally out of control demanding.
But doesn't know how to do anything for themselves. Can't make themselves a sandwich. Can't tie their own shoes. It can't do anything. So what you have to do is you have to let people, for themselves.
You have to let kids brush up against the guardrails of failure. You have to do that. And yes, you have to do that with society as well. In my opinion.
And that's what the thing, the argument that I don't hear back at people that are saying, hey, we should give everything away for free is listen.
We don't have enough to give away everything for free. The best way that you can take care of the most amount of people is to allow freedom, allow individual freedom, allow people to pursue goals, allow people to pursue business, allow people to grow things and hire people.
That's how we all win.
It's so it's crazy to me that we still have these discussions. And it's also, yeah, it's crazy to me that we're having these discussions right now.
There's like this, just like this belief that they subscribe to, which is it only politicians want so mean and corrupt. You know, there's all these things hidden that we could just give you.
And I'm just like, does that really sound right? Like this? It's just that really sound like that's that's correct. That was just all just extra money just hidden in the in the in the treasury that we could just give out, but we don't want to that everybody that we have all these luxury apartments that we could just give out, you know, because housing is a right or whatever or that or that there's just enough doctors and hospitals to take care of everyone and they're just kind of waiting around like not, you know, I mean like come on.
It's not, if it sounds too good to be true, it most certainly is. And again, it doesn't mean that we don't want to keep striving for a, you know, broader access to healthcare doesn't mean that we want to keep don't want to keep striving for a more efficient social safety net.
Not saying that, but the, but the lurch to the, to the progressive left and socialism is it's it's based upon this idea that that we're keeping something from you know, and it's just not true.
Based on this idea too that that that we're going to want to go with this, it's it's it's kind of like a constant escalation of crisis and it's it's it's it's not surprising that we got there. Okay, and this is what I mean by that.
The progressive you're generally wanting more well progress right change for the sake of change itself is often the case and you have to promise more things than you did last time, right because fundamentally it's it's it's based in the sense of compassion.
Giving people things from the government and we'll think very much they don't think much more about what that does the foundation of the creation that you talked about. It's just giving people more things and it's almost like they relied on conservatives for the last hundred years to at least to at least.
Being obstacle to their to their worst instincts right because the conservatives are the ones who say okay hold on like it's think of the second third order consequences of that think of what that does to our foundations.
What I say foundations I mean foundations of a free market system that creates all this wealth in the first place like you can't you can't just you can't remove the legs of the stool if you want to improve the stool I get it let's work on that.
But don't remove the legs of the stool it'll just fall same with our political foundations same with our cultural foundations is three groups that are very important we can I could go on for hours about this but.
But I'll try and stay on top on on on this line of thought here and so you promise more things and you promise more things and eventually you're like running out of things to promise and you got to meet bolder and bolder and bolder.
This is how you get socialism well intention liberalism always leads to socialism it takes years but it happens we're at that point now.
Okay, like the the the the well intention liberals maybe that the the smarter you know democrats that Republicans have often worked with.
I think always over promise but no full well that the Republican colleagues will sort of measure the policy and I don't think they believe it themselves frankly.
But they've created a generation that does believe it.
This is where we're at right now the aOCs of the world are true believers and they've got a lot of followers.
This is what happens when this this live compassion gets told too many times a generation starts to actually believe it and this is the situation where in now says why 70% of the millennials.
Survey will say they would vote for a socialist now there's good news and bad news associated with the number like that they don't always define socialism correctly which is good.
And also I was having a conversation or something about this today I mean in 1968 how many 20 year olds would have said they would have voted for socialism it probably be a private 70% as well.
Yeah, you know there was a socialist candidate I can't remember the name right now but I just saw this quote and it was so interesting because that socialist communist candidate back then in the 60s.
Basically said what I just said you know you you've got to I can't remember the exact quote but it was something along the lines of the the elements of liberal policy are there to eventually create the fabric of socialism for us.
It's like it's it then that is exactly what happens it happens a little bit of a time and here here's another way of thinking about it that that help people understand.
And then the minimum minimum wage okay and you want to raise it to 15 bucks an hour 20 bucks an hour.
And that's fine there's it's guaranteed that you will lose jobs when you do that that's it's guaranteed okay.
And so you lose jobs and depending on how much you raise it in the cost of living in that area you'll lose a certain number of jobs.
Well the the well intention liberal and government who wants to control the economy says well we don't want to lose the jobs okay we'll just make people higher more.
Just make make the employers higher more people okay fine so you make them higher more people but they still have to pay them in a one-way.
Well they're costs haven't changed and they're they're overall budget hasn't changed so so now what will then they have to raise prices right raise prices drastically.
Well now there's hyperinflation and now that's not good and also the poor people can't afford the things that they want to buy so that's not good okay we'll just make them lower the prices.
What we're going out of business okay just take over the business so now you own the means of production.
And I'm not saying it happens that quickly but that's how it happens like there's there's there's a logical line there will that well intention for step of intervening in the markets.
And then you're going to have consequences and eventually if you want to control it you have to really control it and then you're in a really bad place because then you're then you're then you're actually controlling production and when you do that well then you're in a place called Venezuela yeah and that isn't turning out so well.
All right little tangent right there.
It's actually I go into this huge discussion about the minimum wage in the book.
Not because it's actually relates to mental toughness because the way I relate it in the book is.
Part of being part of having fortitude part of being mentally tough is having the ability to think through some questions before you react emotionally.
I'm pretty sure I think that example is used in the chapter called be still and I mean that quite literally just be still when you hear something that is emotionally triggering or you disagree with.
Think about this notion that there might be another side to the story like just maybe if you just ask some questions.
And at first again the minimum wage it seems like the right thing to do like people should just get paid more I want them to get paid more they should.
So I just give the arguments in there like there's economic arguments and there's geographical arguments by that I mean you know why would you have a federal minimum wage the same for the entire country when in San Francisco the the rent is $3,500 a month and in Lubbock Texas $700 a month.
You know does that that just that really quickly makes the case against a federal minimum wage not saying that each city can't do their own thing.
And then I go into the economic arguments of who's actually working a minimum wage jobs the the point isn't to make the argument against the minimum wage the point is to get you to understand that.
This issue like many many other issues and questions has many many layers to it.
And if you stop and you think or at first assume those layers exist right the next step is look into the layers and there might be more to it and when you do that you are exhibiting mental strength you're exhibiting the ability to not react.
But to just ask questions like I have a feeling just a feeling that the people really angrily waving those 15 dollar minimum wage signs have not looked into the arguments.
It's yeah, but they're passionate.
Yes, really you know it.
Yeah, at our factory up in Maine.
Yes, this is a classic thing like sometimes you need more people to load boxes and who do you get who do you get to load boxes is an unskilled job like hey we just need you to move.
And so I'm not even loading by it's moving boxes from here in the warehouse to where they're going to get loaded on trucks to get to shipped out you know you know who wants that job a kid that's a.
16 years old that you know that needs gas money and he's going to work that job two hours a night whatever and make a little bit of cash on the side.
That's cool we get a for to do that at the at our business.
The minute you say hey instead of paying that guy 10 bucks now you got to give him $16 now or well now it's guess what we're going to take.
We're going to just take some of our other labor and have them fill in you know half an hour or half an hour there and all of a sudden you've eliminated three jobs.
The overall budget of the business does not change just because you change the minimum wage, but there's this like belief and again you know it's.
I'm always amazed by how little pockets put into some of these you know feel good policy policy proposals like as if there's no second third order consequences to these things and like you just you have to think through that.
You just have to that would be nice.
All right.
Let's get back to the book.
I'm going to take you back to the book you just you just debrief the entire book we can just say and now.
All right so here we go.
Uh, awake now and long stool. I could not move.
I was beaten and for the moment physically broken.
I was riddled with shards and debris under under the skin and deep within.
I was swollen badly suffering from a thousand small cuts everything burned and itched.
They'll oddly enough.
I don't recall any pain in my eyes.
I said before that I woke up unable to see, but this was not entirely true.
I could see I could not see my surroundings true, but I was certainly seeing.
I was surrounded by constant hallucinations.
The result of my optic nerve still communicating erratically with my brain.
The hallucinations were lucid and all followed a pattern.
I was an Afghanistan. I was with the guys.
I was in an Afghan village mud walls and compounds.
There was an Afghan man sitting next to me.
There were piles of weapons in the corner.
I lived my previous experiences.
I lived my previous experiences over and over again.
I knew it wasn't real. I was hallucinating, but not delusional.
If I was awake, I was seeing these images.
If I was lucky enough to fall asleep and dream, never more than 30 minutes,
then I would wake up and still wake up still inside the visual reality of the dream.
That sounds insane.
That was, that was insane.
Now, was some of that drugs were you on? Were you on any drugs that were given you hallucinations?
No.
This was just all your optic nerve communicating.
There's some research this later in life.
There's some history of this happening to people who go suddenly blind
that that optic nerve will continue to do that.
It couldn't have been drugs.
The only drugs I was on were painkillers and that wouldn't have that effect.
It was just some weird things.
It was so weird.
It kind of terrifying.
It amplified the whole experience.
Because I knew it wasn't real.
I knew it wasn't real.
I would always see them there.
I would talk about them.
The stranger's stories are from my friends.
There's a couple of seals who came to me with Lance to Lance's tool.
It was such a enormous blessing. You can't even describe how important it is for somebody
in that state to just have somebody they know.
Or at least somebody they kind of trust.
It doesn't even have to be a team guy you know.
It could just be somebody who understands you.
Just there.
I remember this old Afghan man sitting next to me.
It was always like a weird blue light.
It really was like a dream out of the movies.
Where like a face would be kind of melting.
I just remember that very specifically.
I don't remember all the hallucinations.
But I always remember piles of weapons.
It was really like we were.
It was remembering the moments which were so many because we would always do two to three
day ops on that particular deployment.
And so we'd hold up in some compound.
And it was you know it's like all the guys are just in this tiny little room together.
Shoot the shit and our weapons are kind of strewn throughout.
And that's what I would see.
I would just see that experience all the time.
And the mud walls and one particularly weird dream.
And I think I do describe this in the book.
It's I was like I was in a third world country.
And like in a department store.
You know like going through a very crowded department store.
Not with people but with clothes.
Like they're like they you know because in like a lot of these countries.
They just it's not like Walmart.
You know where you can comfortably walk through things like they pack too much stuff in.
Because they don't have that much space.
But they got a lot of stuff and they pack it in there.
And I'm just like trying to move through these clothes and it's like musty and the lights are fluorescent.
Like again like this is just a very terrible country kind of scene.
You know I couldn't say where it was but I've been to a lot of terrible countries.
So my mind is used to this sort of visualization.
And then I woke up and I know I'm awake but I'm still there.
And that's what really sucked to not be able to leave the nightmare.
Like I was literally living in a nightmare.
And we always used the word literally wrong in our modern day society.
I'm not using it wrong.
I was literally living in the nightmare.
And like it was in a scapeble.
And that that's what sucked because like you just couldn't you couldn't shake it.
And that's that's a there's just a horrible place to be.
And finally went away when a nurse and a student nurse and a observant nurse just realized what was going on.
And she started asking us about it.
And my wife is just like kind of exasperated at this point.
She wasn't my wife then but she was a fiance then.
And she was just you know exhausted and like just trying to deal with this.
And I think it was like I think it was like right after my first surgery or maybe right before I don't remember.
But she was just like how long has this been going on.
And we're like the whole time.
Like ever since I woke up.
You know, so days and maybe a week I'm not really sure.
And she's like that's not good.
She should.
I mean her response was like you will have a reprobable PTSD if this continues.
You know, because like you just living in a nightmare is not a great place.
It's just and and so she shot me up with a bunch of adivine which was like it's a hard anti anxiety drug.
And then then it got really weird.
Then the hallucinations change.
They didn't go away right away.
They changed to Christmas.
So I was like in a I was like in a like a like a root off the red nose reindeer Christmas world.
This is what you're seeing.
Yeah, even though you can't see anything.
This is what you see.
Yeah, it's very Christmas world.
It's very vivid.
It's not like when you close your eyes and imagine things.
It's like it was vivid.
The Christmas world was cool.
Like that was that's cool.
Yeah.
It was more relaxing.
It was like it was happier.
And then it went black.
And then black black was the best.
That was that was good.
It was like you would never think that you'd be happy to be blind.
But like that was that was a good.
It was necessary.
I could finally take a nap going back to the book here.
Tara.
This was your fiance at the time.
Tara was there when I finally arrived in Bethesda and never left my side from that moment on.
Most of my family came up to see me as did many friends.
They were far more worried than I was and their spirits were low.
This was most likely due to the fact that they were mentally coherent enough to sense the pessimistic
expectations of my surgeons.
The doctors did not think I would see again.
They said so many times and I simply didn't believe them.
My optimism, my self deception and my belief that the coming surgery on my left eye would work
and that I would see was nothing less than a delusional gift that allowed me to keep my sanity.
But I am not one for over expressions of faith.
I will say this.
I genuinely believe.
God's strength was working through me then.
He was allowing me to believe something impossible.
I prayed and my family prayed and we believed.
We believed that the military surgeons would pick through a pierced and shrapnel ridden eye.
Remove the most miniscule shards in debris.
And then restore my sight.
We did not have good reason to believe it.
But we did.
It is interesting that you call this self deception and delusional.
It sounds like everyone else was just like, hey man, you know, isn't it going to work?
Yeah, it was really stopped saying.
It was like, that's exactly right.
It was a necessary self delusion.
And again, I was like, I don't know why that was.
And that's why I say it could have been God.
God saying, you know, I can't.
I'm not going to save your eye for you, but learn real-anseurgence to do that.
But I will at least allow you to believe that it's possible because otherwise you're going to go nuts.
And again, it's, I think my, you know, whatever you want to call it, post-traumatic growth afterwards is a function of being able to,
to live through the experience a certain way.
Because it's terrifying to think that you might not see again.
That's terrifying.
And I, and I, and I'm again, because that, that chapter is called perspective from darkness.
There are other veterans who immediately lost both eyes.
They had no chance of seeing again.
That's hardship.
And I didn't have to deal with that, you know,
if somebody else has had it worse than you.
I always remember that, even when you get blown up in the face.
But yeah, the doctors and that, that continued.
It wasn't just being able to see anything again.
It was being able to see well again.
I was demanding, I was demanding the first surgery.
So the first surgery for my left eye.
Because my right eye's gone.
All right.
I was gone in candle-hard.
They have it to be an off-the-mologist there that,
that, that, that new created the eye right away.
They do that early on so that your body will focus on the, the eye that's, you know, possibly
savable.
But the right eye was so screwed up.
I wish that picture stuff it.
And that's kind of gruesome.
You know, people don't want to take pictures of you in that.
Because they're like, oh, that's not good to take pictures of you.
But, you know, keep in mind that the person might want those pictures later on.
That's, you know, people don't realize.
They had cursed the end of song.
And she got, you know, she got in a Heal of Crash and Afghanistan.
And, you know, she's a beautiful girl.
And she had pictures of her face where 50 cow, like the way that he low went down.
I mean, it, it did some massive damage to her face.
And she has pictures of it.
And you look at the pictures and you can't believe that, you know, she was able to recover
of the way she did.
Yeah.
It's amazing.
But, you know, she's a Marine.
And I will say that she's much aligned with your feelings on this.
I think she's pretty stoked that she has those pictures.
And for example, fall jack to her.
You know, I'll tell you.
You know, I'll tell you, you know, those pictures, was it the kind like, oh, after they got into like the medical,
you know what?
Actually, I think it was, I think it was, if you remember her story, there was some really good plastic surgeon, like a,
Right.
The least surgeon, female plastic surgeon that I think was probably like, oh, I'm in document this.
Yeah, see.
So there's a difference between that and then like, someone being like, a weight guys and bust up the phone and start taking pictures, like, which is what you think a team guy would do.
And it would obviously go, oh, cool check out dance, other eye.
I'm going to get some snaps of this.
And we got some, you know, so I've only got one picture, but it's a good week out.
I mean, it's not, it's at least a few days.
Like it's, there's some healing that has taken place.
But I look, I look bad.
Like it looks like a shock.
I look like I had hit in the face with a shotgun.
That's what my face looks like.
I get show it to you right now.
If you really want to see it, just so you can react to it on the, but it's a little bit of, let's see.
But I've never posted it because it's a little, it's a little too gruesome for posting.
You're a blur it out.
But, um, get the option.
But, uh, yeah, the, um,
Well, not kind of lost my chance.
Where, where, where we are.
So you get that, you get the surgery.
And the book, you talk about, they, they removed, um, the broken lens.
Yeah.
Some copper wire that was in there.
Right.
A bunch of other debris.
So hallucination stop.
And then, then you're six weeks.
They got to put you in a position for six weeks to recover.
Right.
Um, so there's a couple things that happened here.
That's the picture.
Oh, that's a, that's about a week after.
So there's, there's some healing there, but that's not looking great.
Yeah, that's rough.
So, yeah, right, I,
Yeah, right, I's gone. Left eye has a, has a cataract, um, meaning the lens, which is in the middle of your eye is, uh, is destroyed.
Cataracts are pretty normal thing for older folks to get, you know, just basically means the lens has kind of,
I don't know, the right term is, but it kind of clouds over.
You need to replace it.
Um, in my case, it was trauma induced.
So it's much, much of fragments burst through the eye and, and destroyed the lens.
You can kind of look at a lens like a window.
All right.
And this is an important way of thinking about it.
Because if it clouds over, if that window is just, you can't see through it anymore,
we'll just replace the window pane.
But if the blast destroys the window, then you're trying to sew a new window pane onto basically the curtains,
which are like the scolaryl of your eye.
And that was sort of the, the situation I was dealing with.
So the first miracle was they removed the lens entirely.
So, okay, so that things out.
Because I remember this, I think, I think it was in landstroll.
I sort of remember them shining a really bright light.
My eye just to see if I could see light.
And I could see some light. When they did that, what I saw was like darkness.
But there was like a light.
And it was like, we're in this room right now.
And there's this bright light.
But of our heads is kind of like that.
But everything else was like a cloud.
Like being like on an air, like, if imagine you're like going through a cumulus cloud as you're taking off.
Like that's what it looks like.
Very odd and strange.
And um, again, so the first miracle, this, and then,
maybe a week later when I finally got back to the Thursday, and we did the surgery,
they removed the big copper wire that would really been destroying my eye.
So that's good.
And so we kind of start to see some blurring this after that.
You know, which is kind of what I see now.
As I look at you now, I'm wearing a contact.
And with that, if I took this contact out, I wouldn't recognize you.
I wouldn't, I wouldn't know.
I wouldn't run into things necessarily, but I can't see anything.
Um, you know, it's, it's, it's, I mean, I,
it's like, you know, 21,000 vision.
It's like, I can't really see anything.
It's just, it's just blurry.
Can't see close, can't see far.
Can't find my glasses if I lose them.
The glasses I do have are like that thick.
So I wear it night.
Um, we're on airplanes or, you know,
Final feel like wearing a contact.
So that never goes away.
But at the time, I wanted it to go away.
Like I wanted to be like, no, just make the eye better.
I can't, you just do that.
Because I got, I got places to be, okay?
And they're like, yeah, do you?
You know, I was like, I was like, yeah, I mean, I was like, okay.
So you just did this surgery.
We were moving to the cataract.
Now, I want to new lens.
So that I don't have to wear, like, contacts and glasses.
Because I don't look cool in these glasses, right?
I'm not a fan.
And, you know, I don't really have the contact situation yet.
And then, and I actually wouldn't for two and a half years.
It would take to get a really good contact.
That's actually comfortable.
And so I was like, just do the surgery.
And they're like, well, I don't know, they're like, we really shouldn't.
And I was like, okay, what's the, how much do we have to wait to do the surgery?
You know, what's the, what's the minimum time?
Because I need to have it as soon as possible.
Because, you know, I got to get back to the Bluetooth.
And I've got to go back.
And they're like, well, I mean, I guess technically six weeks.
I'm like six weeks, it is.
And I couldn't see them at the time.
But they're looking at each other like, what the hell are you talking about?
Like, this isn't, you don't understand what your situation is.
Like, they were just, I mean, and my wife tells me all this now.
Because I couldn't see them.
And I couldn't, I wasn't self aware enough to gauge people's reactions.
I was in totally different state of mind.
I was on a lot of bank killers and drugs.
And so, you know, and just like, full on seal mode.
Like, get the job done.
You must get back to Bluetooth and kill bad guys.
And it's just like, wasn't making sense to people.
Like, they were just like, I don't know what's wrong with this guy.
And so they just kind of humored me, I think.
Like, they were just like, yeah, sure.
And we'll definitely do that.
But they wanted to know, they had no intention of doing it.
For good reason.
And then, then what you're talking about the six weeks blindness.
That occurred later.
So, these miracles happened and like, we saved my eye.
And that was, that was really exciting.
Then they, you know, but they're, but they're looking at it every day.
And they do this one test.
And they see this hole in my retina.
So, that's not a big deal because it's just just a hole.
You know, it means there's some blind spots.
And as I look at you, I can kind of see the blind spot.
It's like right in my, it's annoying.
But I deal with it.
It's annoying when I read frankly.
The problem with that is you're retina.
The anatomy of your retina causes that hole to expand.
There's a film.
There's like a membrane on the back of your retina that creates tension.
And so, anytime it's a hole in your retina, that means the hole will just expand slowly.
So, it's macular degeneration.
This again, this happens with older folks quite a bit.
The way to fix that is remove the membrane.
We're not really sure why the membrane's on there in the first place.
And so, you just remove the membrane and then, you're good.
All right?
But, and that's fine.
That's actually pretty normal surgery.
But, for me, it was a really high risk surgery because, you know, my eye is so fragile.
And so, they were worried about the retina attaching.
Luckily, it did not, you know, because, well, who knows why.
Again, God's intervention.
And, but you do have to be faced down for six weeks to recover from that.
So, that was just...
You had to lay face down the entire time for six.
You have to lay face down because what they do is they inject this gas into your eye.
And that creates a bubble, which creates tension.
And if the bubble is meant to be pressed up against your retina to keep it in place.
God, it.
And the only way for it to press up against your retina is for you to be looking down.
And so, you just...
Look, damn, it just sucks.
You just have to be faced down, doesn't matter how you're doing it.
Just lay down or walk face down or whatever it is, but just make sure you're facing down.
You're six weeks.
And you're blind all the time.
Because, again, most of the time they'll do this like one eye at a time.
So, if somebody can see still, but, you know, I'm not a one eye at a time kind of guy anymore.
That's it.
There.
You get past that.
You say, when the six weeks were over, I sat up.
And it was not blind.
Moreover, with the help of a truly remarkable contact lens from Boston site
to which the Navy referred me years later.
I was eventually returned to 2020 correctable vision in my left eye.
That's the story of being blown up.
I can't say I recommend the experience.
Yet, even as it was happening, even in the moment after the blast, I had to admit it could have been worse.
I still had my legs.
I had my arms.
I had ten fingers and ten toes.
My brain worked.
Even after a severe concussion.
I was still alive.
It is impossible not to constantly think of the many veterans who have sacrificed so much more.
Impossible not to think of seal petty officer, second class, Mike Montsour, who threw himself on a grenade wall on a rooftop in a modding.
I rack 2006, saving his teammates.
Impossible not to think of Air Force Master Sergeant John Chapman, who fought all night against the Taliban.
Coming in and out of consciousness from his wounds, eventually succumbing to them.
On that Afghan ridge line, but only after earning the Medal of Honor for saving 23 service members.
Impossible not to think of my platoon members in dear friends, Dave Worson and Pat Feecks, who were killed just two months after I was evacuated from helmet.
Impossible not to think of their loved ones who had been expecting them home a month later.
Impossible not to think of the eight men whose initials are tattooed on my chest and remembrance.
Charles Keating the Fourth.
Patrick Feecks, Dave Worson, Brad Cavener, Brett Marryu, Kevin Ever, Brendan Looney, and Tom Falk.
This is the simple reality.
Others have had it harder than me, many, many others.
From that darkness comes realism.
From that realism comes gratitude, from gratitude comes perspective.
The healthy sense of perspective is an antidote to outrage.
It is an antidote to self-pity, despair, and weakness.
It's not a cure all for your mental state when faced with adversity, but it is sure to dull the edges of your worst tendencies toward mental breakdown.
Yeah.
That's the perspective that you and I already talked about today.
That perspective that it would be seem like it would be very helpful for people to think about.
It is.
And you know, I'm using extreme examples, right?
Not everybody can relate to that, but they don't have to.
I don't want you to go be in a terrible situation just to earn some perspective.
Right?
But just the simple reminder to yourself that it exists.
Like somebody else has had it harder.
There's a comfort in that, I think.
And it is an antidote to self-pity.
Self-pity is a gateway to the outrage culture that I think we seal around us.
So if it is a gateway to the socialistic tendencies, I think that we've been seeing as of light,
and you can avoid these things with some perspective and gratitude.
It's hard for anybody in the teams to ever feel sorry for themselves when you know, because you know of these guys.
And you know some of those guys I listed, of course.
And if there's ever a reason you need to get up in the morning, not at 430, but like later, you know,
get a normal human time, then the boys who wish they could get up, you know, that's a good reason,
because they would like to be able to get up and they can't.
And their widows are really wishing they would get up too, and they can't.
You know, and the man I swear I mentioned on some heroes, but the widows are the heroes of the seal teams.
I have yet to meet the wife of one of those guys who fell into self-pity and despair.
I only know ones who have overcome with the greatest grace.
It's just amazing.
I've watched these women just serve as the most ultimate example mothers as well, you know, that I know you know.
Like Debbie Lee for instance.
Absolutely.
It's just incredible to watch that fortitude.
We just couldn't do it without them.
Yeah, so it's always one of the things about Mark's mom and Lafin, I talk about this a lot, is, you know, when we called her from Iraq to talk to her and to console her, she was consoling us.
She was wanted to make sure we were okay.
She wanted to make sure we were handling things.
She wanted to know if we needed anything.
You know, that was her attitude out of the gate.
Yeah.
And that shows you, you know, the kind of people that you're talking about, you know, someone that's taking their own personal worst nightmare that any, you know, any parent could ever have of losing their kid and immediately saying, well, what can I do for you guys?
This is unbelievable.
These, you know,
it was recent, friend, good friend I lost was Chuck Keating the fourth and, you know, his wife started a foundation in his name.
It's dad as well.
And his family's just been incredible.
But that's not, that's, that's not the exception.
Like that's been the rule from what I've seen.
And it's so much harder to be the family left behind than it is to, to be us, I think.
And, you know, we go and we choose to do this thing overseas.
And we're doing it with our brothers and arms and we love it.
And we know what's coming the next day.
We, we're in control to an extent, the greatest extent we can be.
But our family is not there.
Their, their life doesn't change except that we're just not there.
And they don't know what's happening.
And then they get a call.
And I don't actually go into the detail in my wife's experience on the perspectives from darkness.
But, you know, she gets a call.
And so her only consolation is that it's a call and not a guy at the door.
But, you know, it's a call that she's getting before 6 a.m.
And before she her alarm goes off to go to work.
And, and then there's, you know, the, very typical kind of lack of exact information given to her.
She's not sure what my face looks like because they don't know what my face looks like.
They're not sure if it's still there. My head is still there.
Like there's all this misinformation.
Enough enough information to just plant seeds of absolute horror.
It's horrible.
And guess who, but, but, you know, who, you know, who went there first was the Looney family.
Oh, you know, it's like it's, it's, it's Amy Looney there.
You know, who just lost her husband two years earlier.
And she's the one there, consoling Tara.
And, um, it's just, uh, that, that's the type of community that the seal teams is blessed with.
And, um, you know, it's, it is, it is a true blessing.
And it's unique.
I wish it were broader.
I wish we could say, you know, I, I talked to other friends and other,
other communities.
Um, that, that, that, that, that, it doesn't seem,
it's not as good and I wish it was.
I wish, we should all strive to just, to, to take care of each other in that way.
So, rolling into your next chapter and I haven't made my,
caveat that I always make, I'm not reading this whole book right now.
And so when it skips around, it's because I'm not reading the whole book.
You have to buy the book so that you can hear the whole thing.
And, and it, where it's just, you know, when you and I are going off on a bunch of tangents and,
which is awesome, but, you know, the book that has so many great details in it.
And the stories are so clear and the real personal too.
So, you got to buy the book to get that.
Got to buy the book.
You got to buy the book.
So, uh, the next chapter, which you mentioned earlier is called,
Who's your hero?
And I'm going to jump to this part right here where you talk about the seal teams.
It says the seal teams like any, like many military units are relentless in the pursuit of establishing hero archetypes.
Doing so is extremely important when the goal is to create a monoculture that
operates as a mission-oriented team.
This is a community with a very deep sense of who we want to be.
We talk about it all the time and we beat it into our trainees.
Jocco specifically.
It's it.
Into our trainees.
I did some of that.
Here's some of the things that will be beaten into you.
You will be someone who is never late.
You will be someone who takes care of his men, gets to know them,
and puts their needs before yours.
You will be someone who does not quit in the face of adversity.
You will be someone who takes charge of means when no one else will.
You will be detailed oriented.
Always vigilant.
You will be aggressive in your actions, but never lose your cool.
You will have a sense of humor because sometimes that is all that can get you through the darkest hours.
You will work hard and perform even when no one is watching.
You will be creative and think outside the box even if it gets you in trouble.
You are a rebel but not a mute near. You are a jack of all trades and master of none.
And then you go into the official ethos, which you mentioned earlier.
How is debating if I should read this and I think I'm actually just going to read it?
It's a good ethos.
So here we go.
In times of war or uncertainty, there is a special breed of war.
You are ready to answer our nation's call.
A common man with uncommon desire to succeed.
Forged by adversity, he stands alongside America's finest special operations forces to serve his country,
the American people and protect their way of life.
I am that man.
My Trident is a symbol of honor and heritage, but stowed upon me by the heroes that have gone before.
It embodies the trust of those I have sworn to protect.
By wearing the Trident, I accept the responsibility of my chosen profession and way of life.
It is a privilege that I must earn every day.
My loyalty to country and team is beyond reproach.
I humbly serve as a guardian to my fellow Americans.
Always ready to defend those who are unable to defend themselves.
I do not advertise the nature of my work, nor seek recognition for my actions.
I voluntarily accept the inherent hazards of my profession, placing the welfare and security of others before my own.
I serve with honor on and off the battlefield.
The ability to control my emotions and my actions, regardless of circumstance, sets me apart from other men.
Uncompromising integrity is my standard.
My character and honor are steadfast. My word is my bond.
We expect to lead and be led.
In the absence of orders, I will take charge, lead my teammates, and accomplish the mission.
I lead by example in all situations.
I will never quit.
I persevere and thrive on adversity.
My nation expects me to be physically harder and mentally stronger than my enemies.
If knock down, I will get back up every time.
I will draw on every remaining ounce of strength to protect my teammates and to accomplish our mission.
I am never out of the fight.
We demand discipline.
We expect innovation.
The lives of my teammates and the success of our mission depend on me.
My technical skill, tactical proficiency, and attention to detail.
My training is never complete.
We train for war and fight to win.
I stand ready to bring the full spectrum of combat power to bear in order to achieve my mission
and the goals established by my country.
The execution of my duties will be swift and violent when required, yet guided by the very principles that I serve to defend.
Brave men have fought and died building the proud tradition and feared reputation that I am bound to uphold.
In the worst of conditions, the legacy of my teammates, studies my resolve and silently guides my every deed, I will not fail.
So that's the CLEFOS.
And interestingly, I don't know if you do know where that came from.
No, it was actually, I just thought about that in the last three seconds.
I would love to be a fly on the wall as this was getting drafted.
So it was written in 2005.
A bunch of us went to San Clemente Island.
I would say there was maybe 10 or 15.
Probably 10 or 15 team guys that went out to San Clemente Island and made this and made the other like shorter one.
The little short CLEFOS and it was actually part of what was driving it wasn't response to before I think it was before what year did you get to the teams.
I started Buds in 2006.
Yeah, okay. So in like 2003, 2004, there was a platoon that just there was a platoon commander that died his hair.
He was overseas on deployment. Died his hair, blonde, had a pierce earring and was selling drugs to his platoon.
I mean, just a total disaster.
And then there was a bunch of other, you know, look, as you know, as we know, like we're in the news a lot.
And there's spikes, we're in their news for some negative things.
And so there was a couple other really negative things. That was kind of the peak was this guy dealing drugs inside of his own platoon.
And the platoon being a total disaster and getting disbanded and sent home from deployment.
By the way, this is like during a time of war.
So, you know, the admiral who was a great guy said, look, we need to do something about this.
And that's what we went out and the, and this is what came out of it.
I'm looking at, I still remember some little things like there were some things where I was, you know, a little bit more.
I wanted, I wanted them to be a little bit more aggressive on some things.
Yeah. I remember, I remember I got shut down one of the lines that I was like, no, it should be destroy your enemy.
Like that's what we do. And it didn't make the cut.
I think it was in, I think it was this part right here where it says, I stand, I stand to, I stand ready to bring the full spectrum of combat power to bear in order to achieve my mission.
And the goals established by my country. My version, it was to achieve my mission and destroy my enemy or destroy the enemies of our country.
Yeah.
And I got, I got the reins pulled in on me. There was quite a few, but you know, I did all right.
I mean, we got some discipline in there.
I love to see what the Jacob version would be.
Yeah.
You wanted to go more aggressive? No way.
Like that's impossible to believe.
You know, it's interesting. And one of the reasons that, like a lot of the, the discussion around it,
and there were some great, and there was a bunch of great guys out there.
I mean, it was like the animal pit guys to go out there was pretty awesome, a great crew of people.
And at the time, you know, it was 2005, like, we didn't really have as much combat experiences we have.
You know, now, which is just awesome.
But my attitude was like, listen, we're not writing this for 05s, right?
We're not writing this for sealed team commanders or commoners.
Like this thing should be leveled at the point of aim point of impact should be an E5 team guy.
Look, I know that this guy that was a, was an officer that had this bad balloon, but like, that's, that's who, not who we're name it.
We should not have those problems. And like, that's, yes, we got to handle that.
This should be a point of aim point of impact should be an E5 team guy.
That's, that's, that's needs to understand the ethos and go, hey, I need to do the right thing.
Because by the way, if you're an uplatoon and you've got square to eight Fives, they'll destroy that.
They'll, they'll crush that officer that's doing dumb things.
They'll, they'll kill him. Well, not kill him.
Literally Vietnam, Fraxile, but they will get him removed, you know, and, you know, that's what will happen.
So yeah, I think it hits that pretty well.
Yeah, yeah, it does pretty good. It does pretty good.
Yeah, it's, it's a great ethos. And it was awesome to, to be out there when this thing was getting written.
And then see it, you know, it, it, it's always interesting to be a part of things like that that you don't really know, like, I mean,
you don't really understand what you're doing at the time. You know, you're just trying to get the job done, you're trying to do a good job,
but you don't always know what the impact is going to be later when you, when you do something like that,
but you have some honor to be out there and make that happen or help make that happen again.
There's a bunch of people out there.
I was, I, I, I made very well with it.
No, I wouldn't, I wouldn't say it was the junior guy, but there, because there was, you know, there was a bunch of mass chiefs out there,
a bunch of badass mass chiefs here. So, yeah, it's cool.
And it's just, it's so important.
And I'm going to stop jumping ahead on the book now that I understand what we're doing because of
already.
Yeah, I already hit this part.
Should I free brief to you?
I guess. Yeah.
But the, it's so important for an organization to understand who they want to be.
And, and that, that was the whole reason I put the ceiling, those in there, because there's a deep cultural mindset that is beaten into us, you know, quite literally.
There's the more high-minded philosophical approach, which is the seal ethos.
But it does a good job of relating to the, to the lowest level guy, too.
But it's, it goes way beyond the seal ethos.
I mean, there's so many other lessons that get repeated like mantras throughout training throughout Buds, about who you are.
Like what it means to be a guy wears the trident, like what that really means.
And, and this is simple stuff, you know, and I listed some of it earlier, right?
I don't quit just beyond time. Like work when no one's watching, you know, it's like just really simple stuff, but it's like, it's who you better be.
And you better be funny.
Like, you know, that's actually part of our culture.
Part of being better to you better have a really sick sense of humor.
And like, you better go after each other, but it better be funny, you know, it's got to actually, and like, we rely on that dark humor and a really fundamental way.
I, that I think, maybe, maybe a side of us that isn't as prevalent in all the books and all the movies, but like, I like to think we're pretty, pretty funny.
I mean, I've been on Saturday night live, so obviously I'm funny.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah, I know, a thick skin and, you know, the ability to verbally spar with people 24 hours a day from the moment you report into work, the moment you show up until, and any mistake that you make, you better, you know,
you, you throw a shot on a, you know, while you're shooting, you throw a shot and hit something that you shouldn't hate or whatever.
It's just sign up for ridicule because that's what's about to happen.
That's the greatest thing.
It really is.
You got a bunch of stuff in here that's, you start talking about traits.
And you know, again, it's what you're talking about.
Some of the traits of you must be someone that can take a joke.
Uh, did this a very simple.
You want to be productive.
You want to be someone that makes progress every single day.
You want to be someone who identifies a goal and sticks with it.
Again, you don't like about these.
It's just going back to your conversation.
Like, if you think about how you would want your kid to act, these are good things.
This is how you want your kid to act.
You want to be, you want to be seen as reliable.
You want people to ask things of you because you have a reputation for getting it done.
Reliability is an element of fortune.
A mentally tough person can avoid the next cupcake and save it for later after earning with some exercise.
You want to be even tempered.
You don't want to ever want to lose it.
Emotion don't drive your actions.
You want to be humble.
You have confidence, but not overbearing.
Uh, you want to be someone that internalizes someone else's point of view before speaking at them.
Like, these are the kind of things you're talking about.
And, and you, you, you, you, you say this.
The question is, how do we become the heroes we want to be?
My answer sanctioned intellectual property theft.
That's how no one has a pat, no one good habits.
You can steal them.
Identify your heroes and emulate the character traits that make that person more successful than you currently are.
And this, and this gets into, this, I love this.
This is one of my favorite chapters to write because I love psychology.
You know, Jordan Peterson's one of my favorite thinkers out there.
Um, there's a lot of psychological references in this chapter.
And, um, and another one too, but especially this one.
And hero archetypes.
And we already already hit what I meant by hero archetypes.
And that, and I just think that's so important.
You have to have a visualization of what you're looking up to.
You have to look at yourself in ten years and think,
Okay, that's, that's how, how, how would that person react to this situation?
I should react that way now.
Like, you know, and it's hard.
And this isn't supposed to be easy.
And when I say sanctioned intellectual property theft, it's like,
Look at the attributes of people you respect.
You know, like, what did they do?
And like, if you want to get to where they're at, just copy them.
This isn't, this isn't rocket science.
Um, you know, this is, any, any of your listeners are like, well, yeah, that's why listen to Jocca.
Yeah, you know, listen to who is, and you and I were talking about this earlier.
Uh, this idea of sanction intellectual property theft, you know,
uh, extreme ownership.
Is this, is personal responsibility, did I, did I make up personal responsibility in the form of extreme ownership?
No, I didn't, I didn't make up the, you know, discipline equals freedom.
Did I, am I the first person that ever said, you know what?
If you have discipline in your life, you'll have more freedom.
I mean, it's in the Bible.
Like, these, these are things that I, old ideas are the best idea.
And, you know, maybe I wording them away that was easier for people to understand or came out of from a different angle or whatever.
But the fact of the matter is this stuff's out there.
And these are these, these traits that you're talking about are just, as you were saying earlier, it's like,
Oh, if you, we want your kid to not lose their temper.
That's what you, you want your kid to be reliable.
These are really basic things.
And yet, if you don't identify them, which is your point.
And you know, that's what, in the Warrior Kid book.
So I read these kids books.
Well, one of the things in the Warrior Kid books is first his uncle, who's a seal, teaches him all the different codes.
Mm-hmm.
All the different warrior codes from, from ancient times till today to the Ranger code to the seal code.
They're, they're in the book.
And then he says, you need to write your own code.
And that's what he does in the book.
Right, his own code of what it means to be a warrior kid.
And that's what he lives up to.
So same thing you're saying here.
Yeah.
And that again, the discussion about hierarchies and why that's kind of an important way of looking at this.
Because in, in also why I say, you don't pick a person to be your hero.
You pick many.
Real or imagine the characters who, who excel in a certain hierarchy.
And that, that's an important thing to define.
There's different types of hierarchies.
Like some people excel in a jujitsu hierarchy.
If you want to be good at jujitsu, copy this person.
Okay.
But you don't listen to everything they say because they might be all screwed up in some other way.
This is, right?
This is a fact.
Yeah.
Um, but, but like, you know, follow this leader.
Like, there's something about that leader that I like.
And there's something that makes me want to follow them.
What is it?
I should identify it.
I can start to emulate those behaviors.
One note I made in, in your book here is,
I'm a, when you said, when you said to do that, I have plus bad examples.
And in my latest book, Leadership Strategy and Tactics,
I had this beautiful situation unfold where I had a horrible officer that we had a mutiny and got him fired.
And then the guy that took over was the best guy ever.
And super humble gave us ownership.
I mean, it was just awesome.
But I learned, probably as much from the egotistical guy and seeing how we all reacted to him and seeing
how we didn't want to listen to him.
We didn't want to follow him.
As I learned from the guy that was just fantastic leader.
So I look at, you know, hey, here's, I always always pulling the good things from people.
But then also looking at people with negative examples and saying,
Okay, I know not to act like that.
The villains.
Yeah.
That hero's got to have villains.
And it's, and I guess the point of that chapter is,
yeah, to remind people of what some of the good attributes are and to, and to, and to, and to think consciously about identifying those attributes,
identifying yourself as the hero you want to be and then living up to that.
So that's, that's part of it.
But, but the broader cultural conversation is the fact that,
Outrage culture is largely this product of the fact that we have,
we have started to look at the wrong hero archetypes.
We have started to elevate attributes that are not heroic at all into a heroic,
reality and, and it's, it's not good.
And it's sort of, that's the second part of the chapter, the wrong heroes.
And it's, it's, it's what we talked about.
This is a grieved victim status.
The, the loudest person on the internet, the snarkiest person on the internet,
the one owning the lips or the cons.
You know, it's like, that one gets the most likes.
Like, it's, it's passion over sophistication.
And these are not good things.
I understand that it's entertaining, right?
And I understand the temptation, especially on social media,
but it's really detrimental to our larger conversation.
You know, why should the fist-banging activist, you know,
you know, speaking of the power, whatever the hell that means,
why should that be the person we listen to, just because they're mad?
Like, why does anger, big get some kind of credibility?
It doesn't make any sense, but that's how we're acting as a culture.
It doesn't make any sense, though.
And like, I just want us to think through that.
Like, that's the whole point of the chapter.
And we'd be better off if we started to, to kind of rediscover the heroes
that have gotten us through thousands of years of civilization.
And again, the oldest ideas are the best ones.
If, if people have been talking about certain heroic attributes for thousands of years,
there's really good chances or good ideas, because they've lasted.
And they've gone through trial and error.
But, um, but like every generation, you know,
you've got to, when you have to teach those the ideals.
And then, as a young person, you have to stop and think,
maybe there's a reason it's like this.
Maybe I'm not the first one to think in revolutionary terms.
You know, like, just maybe, like, there's a reason your granddad
is telling you it's this way.
And it's not because he's just stupid and out of touch.
Like, just stop.
And like, let's think about that as a possibility.
Yeah, this, it's weird with this.
I would love to try and trace back the roots of this because one thing,
like, one time we were on this podcast, we were talking about something.
And somebody asked a question on a Q&A.
And I, basically, what I said was, and I think you turned it into a clip,
echo tross, is I was saying, like, hey, you got to stifle those emotions.
But don't let those emotions out.
What are you kidding me?
Like, you can't let that show.
And the reaction from some people was, you know, that's horrible.
You should never stifle your emotions.
They'll, they'll, you, it turns into these, whatever.
The mental problems and all this stuff.
And I'm like, people took what I said to the extreme,
which clearly, I don't really believe in anything extreme.
That's why I wrote the book called The Academy of Leadership, right?
That's extreme ownership.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Well, well, interestingly, you know,
extreme ownership can be taken too far.
And you can have people in leadership positions that go to an
extent where they want to own everything and they don't
decentralize anything and it becomes a problem.
Yeah.
So that's why we wrote The Academy of Leadership because you have to find balance in everything.
So with this idea of stifle your emotions, look,
oh, if you lose a loved one, I'm not saying you need to, you know,
get your tough the whole time, right?
No.
And also as a leader in any position,
if you're walking around completely stoic with no emotions,
you won't attack, you won't, you won't connect with anybody.
And so you don't have any personal connections with anybody.
That's not a seal, Patoon.
If you're in a seal, Patoon, and you have no personal connection with your guys in your
Platoon, you're not a leader.
They don't respect you.
They won't follow you.
And I've seen that kind of leader.
Absolutely.
It doesn't work.
So when I say stifle your emotions,
I'm talking about your little petty emotions that you're getting.
Spongebob out some.
Yeah.
That's what I'm talking about.
And especially in my business and like a politics,
like you realize quickly,
you've got to define what you mean in very clear terms,
because everybody's first reaction is to totally take it out of context or
or just assume the worst of what you meant.
Assume the worst of intentions.
I go into the great amount of detail about this and the book too,
because that's a big marker of outreach cultures.
This need, this like desire to be like just assume the worst of what you meant.
Oh, stifle my emotions.
Okay, just walk around like robots. Of course, that's not what you meant.
You know, like let's, let's be gracious with how we understand each other,
just like just a tad.
We'll be a lot better off.
Next chapter.
It's called no plan B, which is, you know,
got a little counterintuitive sound to it because as a seal,
and as a human being, you're always like,
oh, you know, you got to have a plan B in case something goes wrong.
Yeah.
Here's your premise behind this.
You don't entertain the plan B option because when you do your entertaining failure.
And in entertaining failure, you will embrace it ultimately the no plan B mentality
isn't about keeping you from doing something rather it's about embracing a positive goal
as your only choice.
It's about enabling you to do something.
It's about clearing the paths to your goals, to your achievements,
to your tasks and your responsibilities.
So, you're, you explain your idea behind no plan B.
So, this started out as I was thinking about how not to quit a buzz.
And whenever any time I'd ever been asked that question,
I would simply say, well, because I never had a choice.
Because I just didn't think about buzz as a choice.
I didn't think about it as an achievement that I would, you know, hopefully make.
It was just like, okay, I just have to do this because that's just I just have to.
You know, and I think most of us who made it through buzz just had that mentality.
Like, okay, I just have to do another boat race.
And then man, this really sucks.
Like, I really hate this.
But I just, I don't have a choice.
You know, it's, there's no other option.
There's something liberating about that mentality.
It's the only mentality you can have.
And it is truly a no plan B mentality.
So, and I'm very, and I'm, and I explain that in the book.
I'm like, I don't mean no contingencies.
Obviously, you have to plan ahead.
But no plan B is fundamentally about not quitting.
And not quitting needs to be defined rather carefully.
You know, and I, and I point out, like, changing directions in life could seem like quitting.
It's not necessarily like you're not a good artist.
Just stop.
Like you're just not good.
It's time to change directions, man.
You know, and that's okay.
Like that's, that's okay.
That doesn't, you know, it's, and then I go into a much deeper conversation about living with purpose.
Ultimately, what I mean by living your plan A and not living your plan B,
it is about living with purpose.
And purpose is, is something only you can tell really if you're living up to it or not.
It's hard to tell from the outside.
But you know, you know if you quit.
Like you know if you just didn't do the right thing to, to, to live up to your angle.
And, and, and, and, and, and execute the millions of smaller tasks that you need to execute to live up to your angle.
And, and I think this is also the chapter where I really go into some deeper discussions about,
uh, uh, uh, one of my favorite quotes from St. John Paul or Pope John Paul II,
which is, you know, America freedom is, is, is, is, it's not the right to do what you want, but,
but, but, but the, what the freedom to do what you ought, right?
I'm screwing up that quote a little bit, but the point is this, you live with ordered liberty.
Ordered liberty means we live with a purpose.
Like we have, we have freedom, and with that freedom, we have a responsibility to live as we ought to live.
Now we have to define, okay, what is living, how we ought to live, like that's a whole other discussion.
And this is why religion is so important. This is why religion is such an important foundation.
Our Judeo Christian history is a very important foundation of our culture.
Even if you don't believe in God, you have to admit that we get our morality from this place, from the ten commandments.
And that matters, like it matters in a really deep way.
And I'm a right, you know, kind of that sense of absolute morality, where our laws come from,
where this notion comes from of what it is to do the right thing, how do you define the right thing?
Again, we've already talked about this.
If it's based in thousands of years of wisdom and trial and error, there's a good chance that it's right.
Okay, not a guaranteed chance, but there's a really good chance.
Even if it doesn't feel good or doesn't feel nice and compassionate, it's real, and it creates a sustainable society.
And ultimately, sustainable societies should be our angle.
Our outreach culture is counter to a sustainable society.
It is chaos manifested in our words and our actions.
Yeah, you say here, pure freedom is chaos, anarchy and moral decay, freedom to do what you like without any more.
Compass can quickly result in the temptation to indulge in habits that may feel good momentarily, but are wholly detrimental to yourself and others.
Pure freedom detached from a higher sense of purpose results in at best in overindulgence, lack of discipline, unfaithful relationships, and some drug use at worst,
it can result in the total deterioration of a society.
And you know, I think it was actually Jason Gardner when before he was out of the team, but he was listening to podcast and he was hearing me talk about,
I think he was hearing me talk about the Gulogzer or just something, and he goes, hey, discipline equals freedom.
That applies to societies too, doesn't it?
Yes, it does. If you have total freedom, everyone do it whichever you want, well then you're destroyed and you end up a slave to, well, you end up a slave to any number of things,
whereas if you have discipline inside of a society which is called law and order and you fall those rules, well then you actually end up with more freedom, which is what we try to hear.
Yeah, discipline equals freedom is the simplest way of putting that because it's very true.
And it's been true for a very long time.
Indeed, indeed.
Next chapter, again, I'm jumping forward here, next chapter, this is the chapter.
This is the chapter.
You put got to read the book, you don't want more.
Absolutely, there's a lot more in there.
There's a ton. And you do, you give a lot of, almost academic level back up.
So you give some common sense stuff, you give some academic and you talk about the psychological, psychological viewpoint of things, some historical references.
You do a great job of balancing out what you're saying and showing multiple examples from different aspects.
So that's why the book you have to read the book to get all that information.
The next one is called Be Still.
I got to read this little section in the sealed teams.
Our first exercise in training, the mind to be still is drown proofing.
And yes, it is as ridiculous as it sounds, as legend has it.
And it may indeed just be legend.
Drown proofing originates from the story of an American POW in Vietnam as the vehicle and transported him along the May Kong River.
They decided they'd have enough, had enough of him and threw him overboard.
But this was not some magnanimous gesture of human civility.
He was not being released for good behavior. They expected him to drown.
It was reasonable expectation.
His hands were tied behind his back and his feet were tied together.
Visualize that for a four second.
This creates quite the predicament, especially when you are trying not to drown.
He had to figure out how to swim to shore.
And as the story goes, he did just that.
Ever since then, a key element of seal training involves drown proofing us,
making sure that we too can jump from a boat with our hands and feet tied.
And then you go over the multiple ways to do this.
And you say here, to do this, it requires that you do not panic.
Wall instructors are yelling, don't panic.
And that's, you know, you talked about that as being sort of one of your first lessons in learning how to be called.
And not freak out about stuff.
It's, it's such a necessary part of of military training.
And drown proofing is an excellent way to do it.
Not, not because we actually think that might happen.
How unlucky with that be.
That be unlucky.
Or lucky. And it's like, wow, okay, you're just like training.
They put a weight on you, though, your screwed or, you know, there's a lot of ways to tie you up.
Anyway, I'm not the point.
The point is not that you're preparing for this specific eventuality.
The point is is that you, you have a set of skills and you better implement those skills while the fear of drowning is all around you.
And of course, it gets worse than the drown proofing gets into the dive comp or pull comp, which is,
It's probably my least favorite thing.
When I got to Buds, I had no idea what it was.
They had a Texas chainsaw massacre movie poster up, but it had, it was crossed out.
It said Buds pull comp, massacre.
They had like, drown a regulator on the person getting murdered by leather face.
Yes.
Yeah.
So I was like, well, what that is, but yeah, sure enough.
Sounds great.
I'll sign me up, you know.
I think I can.
Yeah.
I failed to go and pull comp.
I failed and I was recycled to the next class.
No, I mean, I, I, I, we, I got to retest again on Monday.
So we took pull comp on Friday.
Yeah.
And we got retested on Monday if we failed.
Okay.
Well, yeah, I mean, I failed first couple of times.
I, I don't very rarely really feel through the first time.
Yeah.
I was not happy.
What's full comp?
Pull comp is they put an old school dive, Greg on you, select the old school
School of Tanks and this thing called the, what's it called?
Do holes regulator?
I think there's a hose that comes in that brings the ear in and there's one that you blow out.
And they put you down on the bottom of the pool and they just start to just mess with you.
They rip your regulator, the rip your mask off.
And then they start tying knots in your regulator that you have to then untie underwater.
And you have to follow all these proper procedures to get everything back on.
Meanwhile, they're slapping you in the head.
They're grinding your face into the thing, into the pool deck.
And it's, it sucks.
And eventually they tie something called a whammy knot, which is a knot that you can't get out.
And so they tie this whammy knot.
And then you have to go to proper ditching procedures, which means you take your rig completely off.
You have to attempt to get it to work.
If you can't get it to work, you take off your weight belt.
You lay it over your rig.
And then you look at your instructor.
You give them the thumbs up and then you do a proper free swimmer ascent.
And if you mess up any of you, and there's procedures for everything.
And if you mess them up, then you fail.
So, but it's, it, it's, it's, it's no joke.
Like they come out and freaking hammer you.
Yeah, that's a man.
And then they always, they always get you as you have vexed.
So, yeah, they're watching the bubbles.
And they're the wave.
And then the wave, they call it a surf hit.
Like, so they're simulating this wave.
This amazingly complex wave that somehow ties your hoses and knots.
It's like, isn't true.
That's not real, okay?
Like there's no wave like that.
But it's not the point.
You know, it's, it's, it's same with drown proofing.
But the point is not to prepare you for this eventuality.
There is no way in hell that your hoses will ever be tied to knots.
Mostly because you'll never use a rig like this.
That actually can be tied to knots because this rig is not,
It's, it's just for training.
So, that's not the point.
The point is the procedures.
The point is you're drowning.
Will you still calm yourself and work through procedures?
That's the entire point of the exercise.
If you panic, you are going to fail.
And there's physiological reasons for that because you're using more objects.
And freaking out.
And there's psychological reasons and just the instructor, these instructors are seals.
They don't want to guy in the teams that's going to be on a dive with them.
That's going to freak out if something goes wrong.
Because stuff goes wrong when you're diving.
So that, that to, you know, from your perspective was a, was a,
The initial recognition of like, hey, I better be calm.
Right.
Be still as you say.
And yeah, the reason I say it,
But the reason I say it, but he's still because I was thinking of the patrolling acronym that we use.
Okay.
So, you know, stop looking, listen, smell.
Mm-hmm.
And that's exactly what it sounds like.
You stop because you've, you've done something to the environment.
Maybe you landed with a helicopter.
And that's actually, you know, I don't want to give too much away in the book.
But there's a really great intro to this chapter, everybody.
You've got to buy it and know what it is.
And so you stop and you've, you've created a disturbance.
So stop and look around, just chill and look around and then keep moving.
That's, cells, cells.
We just, that's what we say.
And it's patrolling tactic.
It also kind of sounds like still.
And it's kind of the same meaning.
Same old for sure.
That's why I named it chapter B still.
And, um, and then you apply that to your life.
Because I, I understand that not everybody is going to be thrown overboard with their hands and feet type.
But if you are, I go in a great detail about how to overcome that particular predicament.
It is possible.
Yeah, there's, there's a lot of methodology there.
It's much easier than you think, as long as you don't panic.
So, and, uh, it'll, this is another chapter called do something hard.
So, hey, you know what, you're do something hard.
It could be drowned proofing.
And everybody can do this.
Do it with a buddy that you're not doing.
Do it with a buddy.
It's a good answer.
That's the worst thing.
One up one down.
Luckily, it's hard to tie your hands behind your back without a buddy.
So, um, the, uh, the point is this, it's, again, old lessons, count to ten before you react.
But that's, it's fundamentally what this chapter is about.
And we have a, had a habit lately, given the, um, given the extreme nature of our, uh, kind of immediate gratification that occurs with social media,
to react very quickly and wildly about things.
Um, our media reacts unbelievably quickly and wildly about things.
And it is, it is a disservice to our country.
It is, I mean, I, that's an extreme statement, but it is true, it has gotten out of hand.
And it's, it's so bad that I felt the need to write this book.
Um, our media doesn't, but we're, but again, their media is feeding off of us.
We have to do better as individuals.
We have to, to say, like, that's not going to work on me.
You know, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that,
that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that quick over the top reaction is not going to work on me.
I'm not going to do it. I'm not going to feed into it. I'm not going to reward it.
That's, that's, that's our duty.
You have to not click on click bait headlines.
Yeah.
Well, I mean, I can't help myself.
I'm going to click on the click, but I'm not going to react to it, right?
So that's the, you know, and even for good practice, go ahead and click on it.
See if it makes you mad. And if it does do it again.
It's, like, just, it's incredible when you, when you click on a clickbait article.
And I'm talking mainstream news media. And you go, oh, my gosh, I can't believe that happened.
And then you click on it and you're like, wait a second.
Yeah.
That's not what happened.
I just got click baited.
Don't let it happen.
And the problem is, well, actually, see the problem is, is that people don't click.
The problem is, oh, that's really, that's, and I go into the,
and a lot of detail on that actually, I give some example.
I could give examples every single day.
I just kind of chose some random ones for the book.
But an example might be, the examples I use in the book are regarding something like environmental regulations.
Because this is a very emotional topic for people.
When you hear the Trump administration repealed 12 Obama era environmental regulations.
Here's what you're thinking. And be honest, this is what you're thinking.
You're thinking black or green sludge, oozing into a river.
You're thinking black smoke, like emanating from a factory, all of a sudden,
while these corporate fat cats count their money and birds are falling out of the sky.
Like, this is what you're thinking.
If you're being, like, this is the visualization that occurs.
But is it true?
Nobody asks the second question.
Is it true?
Yeah.
What does this actually mean?
Or what does it mean?
Or like, why would they deregulate that?
You know, why was it put in place just a few years ago?
You know, I mean, like, what kind of regulation wasn't?
You know, is there a good reason for it?
And then I go into basically a case study on something called new source regulation.
And we don't have to talk about it now.
But it's, I basically write a case study on this because it's important.
Like, there's, there's good examples and there's, and there's,
there's, and then the headline about that particular regulation.
Basically said, you know, Trump is removing air pollution regulations.
So again, your mind goes to those places I just talked about.
The article itself kind of gives both sides.
It's actually not about article. And this is usually the case.
And my experience, because I, you know, do this every day.
And my experience, the, the writer, the journalist is not always,
but a lot of times, like, actually kind of gives a balanced article.
But the editorialized headline is terrible.
Totally misleading.
You know, that their own article debunks the headline.
And you're like, what the hell is going on here, okay?
Now, a lot of that's oftentimes because the journalist is not the one writing the headline.
Okay, so that's, that's a whole different story.
And then you look into it, right? And it's like, okay, well, it turns out,
yeah, they want to, they want to make it easier for factories to,
to update their systems or, or power generation plans to update their systems.
They don't want to have them go through this new source review regulation,
which is extremely costly and unpredictable.
And environmentalists say, well, that's just, that's just,
you're just giving away to corporations, right?
You're deregulating them, but it's like, well, no.
And as it turns out, if you want to put a carbon capture addition to your power plan,
which means capturing more pollutants or carbon dioxide,
then you can't.
You can't go through this extremely costly new source review.
Well, maybe we should stop that.
You know, like, thinking that's, and that's the background.
You know, I can go to a lot more detail on that, but just one example.
I could think of an example almost every single day.
Like, the headline just isn't what you think, you know?
But let's, let's bring it back to coronavirus.
So the headline is, you know, the Trump administration screwed up the coronavirus test.
Like, South Korea is testing 20,000 people a day,
and we've only done like, you know, 10,000 tests or something.
And by the time you're listening to this podcast, that reality has changed drastically,
but in our current moment, that's what happened in the last couple months.
And there's some truth to that, like the America was behind on tests,
but who's actually at fault?
Ask the question, right?
And then look into the answer from some different sources.
Because the truth is FDA never approved any South Korean test.
For all we know, those tests aren't very high quality.
There's different kinds of tests.
You know, they might give false positives or false negatives.
That stuff matters when you're trying to control an epidemic.
You know, it would be easy to just buy the South Korean test.
We don't do that.
Because Trump said we don't want to do it.
And not because Trump isn't taking it seriously.
It's not even Obama.
It's actually none of their fault.
It's just our system.
Our system is in there for a reason.
Like, we have a very strict system from the FDA on what kind of test can be used for stuff like this.
Now, that exists for a decent reason.
For instance, if people remember the, I think it's called Theranos.
The, the lady who has fake the fake cancer test.
That's absolutely called Theranos.
Yeah.
Absolutely.
You're very sure of that.
No, I tracked on that big time because there's a, there's a very interesting case study.
Yeah.
You're in the corporate.
Yeah, for about a million different reasons.
It's a really interesting case story.
And just that.
Yeah, fake the cancer treatment.
It was just cancer.
It was like, hey, you can identify literally hundreds and hundreds of problems that you could have medically
from a single pin prick of blood, which was just just completely not true.
Not true.
Just not true.
Now, going into more detail, that particular lab was federally regulated and qualified under a certain type of regulation through CMS.
But they, but not through the FDA's regulations.
Okay.
So eventually they were caught, right?
And that that's what it's for.
Like, that's what the regulation is for.
So it's still annoying, right?
It we should have more tests for the coronavirus available.
But our system was not designed to make that happen quickly.
It should have been.
I'm not saying there's not room for some lessons learned here and some change and we will make those changes actually.
The administration frankly already has.
So.
But the only way to do it is to get the private sector involved and to give them the flexibility to do the test and then to,
and then to streamline the FDA's testing of that test so that we know it's actually a decent test.
You know, there was this.
The point is, right?
Like, stop and think and wonder.
Be curious.
Like, is.
Is it true that a test is just a test?
Like, of course not.
Like, there's all different types.
It's a number.
You know what I mean?
It's a summer lab, some of our test kits, like, someone were accurate then others.
Like, is it possible that it's more complicated than the headline is telling you?
Is it possible?
Is it just a little bit possible?
You know, and again, when I say the media does such a disservice, it's because it's so, you know, you should have somewhat of a combat of media against government.
You know, their point is a check in balance against government.
But you would hope that their purpose would be to educate.
And that I believe that has changed radically.
I believe they don't longer view it as there is their duty to educate the public.
They, they only see confrontation as their duty.
And I don't find that to be a good service to the American people.
I would say that is an accurate statement.
The news does that or has been doing that a lot though, even like regular local news, they do that where they'll.
And but it's not you don't click on it, but it's the same concept when they say,
You're is yourself own killing you.
More ready, Levin.
You know, so it's like, that's the clickbait right there.
They've been doing that for a long time.
And then yeah, then you, then you listen to it because you're like,
It might be killing me.
Yeah, I listen to it.
And then it's like, Oh, yeah, you know, someone dropped their cell phone and it like made them,
You know, do something they killed.
Do something to be like totally innocuous.
Yeah, yeah, deep bumps the headline.
Speaking of headlines.
Next chapter.
Sweat the small stuff. This chapter. This is the chapter I gave you permission to complain.
Permission to moan and grown about the nitty gritty small, but annoying ankle biting in conveniences.
We face in our everyday lives.
Permission to gripe about even your smallest troubles.
Grumble about long lines at the drive through and wind about the imperfect weather.
I'm actually going to encourage it. You're welcome.
Okay, don't think me yet.
There are certain ground rules.
One, sweating the small stuff is okay, but exercise your complaints lightheartedly.
Seek out humor in your whining, be humble, be self aware.
Two, if you're all, if you allow yourself to sweat the small stuff and I think you should,
Then you must also force yourself to be detail oriented.
Three, if you allow yourself to sweat the small stuff, then you must try your hardest not to sweat the big stuff.
What are you talking about here?
What actually kind of goes back to when you got a, I just restrained myself from moving to this chapter when you set it before.
When you got a bunch of criticism, right?
For saying, don't be emotional about stuff.
And people are like, well, you can't tell me that.
And then it makes the emotional, ironically.
But in your reaction was, okay, I'm not saying, be a robot.
You know, I'm just saying, like, don't let it get the best of you.
And so I really wanted to be like, oh my god, it's like my chapter about sweating the small stuff.
Because because of every time you're told, you know, oh, don't sweat the small stuff.
And I'm like, well, I don't know about that.
I think there's some venting that has to occur.
And I think we take it a little too far in the seal teams.
Oh yeah.
I mean, we complain about the smallest of things, but there's like, but I, and I examined that.
Like, this chapter is about examining that truth.
Why do we do that? Are we a bunch of divas?
Yes. Yes.
But that is the, that is true. Two things going to occur.
That's true.
Things can be true at once.
We can be divas, but there's also a deeper reason and value to it.
As long as you do it right.
And I try to examine that carefully in this chapter about what the right way is to complain.
And like I try to set some ground rules, like be funny.
Being funny is a decent way to do things.
It can't be too serious.
Like there's a difference between complaining about how crappy the coffee is at the command.
And complaining about the actual command atmosphere to your guys.
There's a, there's a big difference.
From a leadership perspective, there's a difference there.
Like one can be kind of funny and just like, oh yeah, stupid, whatever.
Coffee's crap and the, the buildings stupid or whatever.
Like the same things people that the gym isn't hard enough.
There's not enough weights because I'm stronger than whatever.
You know, typical dumb team guy complaints.
There's a difference as a leader.
That's what the gym is complaints though.
Yeah, especially.
Yeah.
No, I completely all the time.
Like, oh, because we're out of 45 pound plates.
You know, my deadlift.
But the, um, just as a leader, especially the big difference between that and being like our CEO is messed up.
Yeah.
That's, that's, this is one of the things I talk about leadership strategy and tactics is like,
If you are just white washing everything, this coffee is fantastic.
And it sucks.
Your guys are starting to look at you going, okay, wait a second.
You're, you're not real. And you think that you're, you're not questioning.
You're not pushing back against anything.
However, like you said, if you come down and you say,
or commanding officers in the idiot, that's going to be problematic.
So you got to, you got to be careful about what you're complaining about.
To your point, complaining, forms some level of bond, right?
That's one of the things that we do in the teams.
Yeah.
Like we're going to complain about the, the freaking birthing that we have.
And the this, that, the other thing.
And it's like, okay, cool, because we're all in the same team.
I'm playing about it. But if somebody starts complaining about things that matter
at a more strategic level, now we got a problem.
The other part of the don't sweat the, the sweat, the small stuff mentality is the
Detailory Antipart. This is really important because one, being detailed,
Detailory Antid is an element of fortitude.
I would argue.
I think rather effectively.
And I wrapped it into this chapter though.
And you can probably wrap the detail oriented mindset into many of the lessons in this
chapter. But I put it into this one because if you're sweating the small stuff, then by definition,
you work in certain about small things.
And it's not self-evident to me that being so chillax about all the stuff is a virtue.
And we sometimes see that as a virtue like like the big, I know like the, the dude from the big
LeBouceking, that guy doesn't care about anything.
But is that good?
Well other than bowling.
It's why Russians.
He was pretty passionate about those things.
That is true.
Another occasion, Harry.
But you know, it's like, you know, you're that, that cool kid in high school.
Who just like, let's everything roll off their back.
You know, it's like the cool surfer dude.
I got it. I'm not saying there's no value in that.
But it's not self-evident to me that that's what we should aspire to.
Because it's not obvious to me that that they're a highly productive people.
Maybe they are.
Not saying they can't be.
But if you're not concerned with small things, there's a pretty decent chance.
You're not concerned about bigger questions in life, about bigger elements of personal responsibility.
Or you, you might not be that motivated to, to move up the hierarchy that we talked about.
And so being concerned with the small stuff is, is a habit.
It's an Aristotelian.
And the Aristotelian sense, we build good habits that that are, that are meant for a higher purpose.
That's what makes them a good habit.
We do it because it is good.
And so that's the deeper thing here.
Yeah, complain a little bit.
Like, like, especially, you know, on the way.
I'm the way here.
We're going down, uh, as at Midway Drive.
And, um, San Diego has often had this problem.
And I've complained about it for a very long time, which is that the lights are not synchronized.
They're not synchronized for traffic flow.
The way like New York City is in Manhattan.
Those are well synchronized lights.
One of my biggest pet peeves is the lights are not synchronized.
Because it's a solvable problem.
Might and too, but to synchronize the lights, you know, as a city manager or a mayor or a
or a systemist.
And, uh, it's like, as I was going from red light to red light, trying to get to, to
Jocco's podcast because I cannot be late because I just wrote in my book that I gave him
Don't be late.
That was funny.
I was like, these different lights.
You know, and so, that my wife is like, I am so sick of hearing you can play in about the
where she's like, she hates this chapter because she's so used to the seal team culture.
She's like, why do you even write this?
Like, don't encourage this.
I'm like, I'm trying to encourage it to the right extent.
You know, and because it is, I am walking a fine line for sure.
Um, and we're trying to, we're trying to, you know, reverse some, some commonly held beliefs.
And, uh, it was a fun chapter to write.
It was one of my favorite.
Yeah, and obviously you just met me that dichotomy of this is if you get so focused on
little things, then you are wasting your time, you know, you're wasting your time.
The, the, uh, mats on my personal home gym, my, our dirty.
And people say, you're, that's, you need to clean your mats.
What kind of discipline is that?
I'm like, look, I would have to spend an hour a day clean those mats to make them look
clean.
Maybe even more than that.
I don't, I don't care.
But it's my garage gym. There's chalk on the floor and sweat.
Yeah.
That's the way it is.
I'm not worried about it.
Yeah, and that's, that's a really good point too.
And it's, it's, well, it makes, especially makes sense in the, in the context of the dichotomy, right?
Right.
And like, and I, and I hope that what I write there,
helps people understand that there is a balance, you know, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's operating in that gray area.
So that you can focus on the big stuff because, you know,
seals like to complain about wet socks, like a lot.
I could say, and I, and I go into great detail about this.
And we avoid wet socks that, you know, to an extreme extent.
But when, when things get really hard, you know, we, the complaining seems to stop.
When things are really serious, we understand and have some perspective about that.
And we, when we act accordingly.
And, uh, and I think that's perfectly relatable to regular life.
You know, it's, it's why we go, it's why we go and do happy hours after work.
You know, you're just, you're blowing off some steam in a healthy way.
Why people go see a therapist.
Like, you're, you're really just, you're really just complaining to the therapists for an hour.
And that's, that's not a big thing.
That's there.
That goes so.
Yeah.
It's like, it's like, you're just kind of letting that steam out so that you're, you're, you're, you're,
you're, you're holding tank of emotions doesn't explode in somebody's face.
And that's because that's how you lose an eye.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.
Uh, next chapter.
The right sense of shame in America today, we too often look at personal feelings
as things to overcome move past or forget.
Sometimes we should do one or all of those things, but we should also do something else.
Learn our lesson.
And we'll listen to public figures who run headlong and to self inflicted failure,
personal political or otherwise, and then reemerge shameless without having appeared to learn a thing is long.
Don't get me wrong.
I'll know opponent of redemption far from it.
I certainly believe there should be space for reemergement, reemergence from public sport.
Scorn.
I believe redemption is a trademark of an enlightened society.
One of the most more detestable social trends now is mocking,
is the mocking of redemption and the dismissing of the idea that it is possible or even desirable.
In place of a system of repentance, justice, and mercy, we have a culture of mindless fury and outrage culture.
So you, you, you've talked about this sense of shame, which is like a really important thing.
And I, I looked at this from a team guy perspective, the amount of shame, like for instance,
if you forget a piece of gear, you,
when, when a guy in one of my platoons or my task you to make a mistake,
I almost never had to do anything other than simply very quietly acknowledge that that I saw.
I can't know you know.
And they would take, crushed the shame would just drive them to never make that mistake again.
That's what you're talking about here that we've kind of lost that in a sense.
Like in a huge sense.
And in a huge sense, and then the other side of that is like, hey, just because you forgot something,
doesn't mean I go, I don't want you in this platoon, you're a piece of shit.
You can get, no, no, no, no, no, it's like, it's okay.
Hey, you made a mistake, you own it, you admit it, you tell me what you're going to do to fix it.
And then we're back on the level and I'm, you know, we're ready to move forward,
which we don't have.
And then of course, you go into this whole episode that took place with a,
a comedian whose name is Pete Davidson.
Is this name?
Yep.
So this guy, this guy is on Saturday night live one night.
And he says, they put a picture up of you.
And they put a bunch of, a bunch of politicians up there.
And then they put a picture of you up in this guy, Pete Davidson says,
this guy is kind of cool.
David's incorrect.
Dan Crenshaw.
You might be surprised to hear he's a congressional candidate from Texas
and not a hitman in a porno.
The audience, howled, or as the audience, howled,
Davidson jumped in with a quick aside.
I'm sorry.
I know he lost his eye in war or whatever.
So, that happened.
Yeah, that happened.
I want to, in most people know that story by now.
I do give some behind the scenes never before heard elements to that story.
Yeah, it's good detail.
Which way you got to read the book.
But why is that in the shame chapters?
The question, I think.
I want to hear your perspective on that whole thing too.
First, because you told me a minute ago.
Yeah, you know, from my perspective, it looked like this.
Like this is just be clear, like during the election, when it all happened.
Because I was on your show last time well before, or never ever happened.
No one knew who Dan Crenshaw was back then.
When you first came on, when you first came on, no one really, you, you, you, you just started your character.
That was early.
And yeah, so it was early.
But now all the sudden man overnight, everybody knew who you were because of this.
And what happened was, from my perspective,
was people people started hitting me up on social media like,
Are you gonna, you know, denounce Saturday live?
And, you know, what did you think of this?
And then they put the little thing in there.
And, you know, of course, my kind of gut was like kind of funny.
You know, I was like, like my response was like, kind of funny.
I don't know that that made me laugh.
But here's the thing.
Luckily for me, I'm always behind on Twitter.
Like I'm not quite caught up.
And as I finally started what I was like, okay, I'm gonna respond to this right around then.
And I was like, man, what do I, I'm like thinking of myself.
I don't think Dan is like crying over this.
I don't think he's at home going.
I can't believe that some comedian made fun of me.
Like, I'm thinking of it.
But people are acting as if you were outraged.
They were outraged for you.
And, you know, God bless him.
It wasn't like they were bad people.
They were just offended by it, right?
What we do now.
Yeah, they were offended by it.
And like you and I both know, I'm like, hey, man, that's something that probably has been said to him a hundred times in a platoon space somewhere.
You know, like they're gonna make fun of you for everything.
So anyways, when I finally responded, it was like, I think Dan can handle himself or something.
And I quoted you saying, hey, whatever your thing was like, hey, I'm not outraged.
It's fine.
He's literally a comedian in one to get on use the term literally in its right.
The guy is literally a comedian.
He's supposed to make fun of things and make people laugh.
He's not doing political commentary.
And it's not a personal attack on you for just him.
Just to attack you as a human being.
He's trying to make people laugh.
So that wasn't kind of my perspective.
It's funny how like when you're in a position like you are and I am in, you know, people like they hit you up on social media.
It's almost like this challenging like you better do this or I'll never, never like you again.
Or if you don't do what they want, I like to.
But now I can't trust you anymore.
It's just funny how that works.
So that's one element of it.
But the, yeah, the hit me on an apporno thing was pretty funny.
Like that was, that is no idea.
I don't think that even pissed off anybody to be honest.
It was the, it was the, the next comment, which was,
Yeah, I mean it was very dismissive.
It was actually the whatever.
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
Yeah, yeah, if he hadn't said that, he wouldn't have received any backlash.
If he would have said, I'm sorry, I know he lost his dying war.
It would have been like that.
You know what?
Okay, cool.
Yeah.
And then he said, or whatever.
Right, right.
And it was a very dismissive tone.
And now, okay, so why is that in that chapter?
And it's because of this.
So the point is, is that the Saturday night live story was a story fundamentally about showing the right sense of shame and reaction to that.
So because it could have gone a lot different.
Like I could have asked Jaco to be like denounced them for me.
And they're like, okay, fine, Dan, Jay.
God, being kind of a bitch by the way.
And I could have actually stoked the outrage and just like played the agreed victim.
And by the way, if you read left wing media these days, they'll say that's all the things I did.
It's actually absurd how they rewrite history.
Oh, 100%.
It's insane.
Like the lies that occur from left wing media or don't give me started.
I already started.
But okay, so that's not what happened.
Right?
I was like, my line was something along the lines of like, you know, in this life, like try or not to offend people, but also try really hard not to be offended.
So, you know, it's kind of sucks what he said.
But now I'm not going to ask for him to be denounced or I don't want him to demanding an apology.
Be careful not to demand an apology.
I don't care if they apologize.
It's like my life goes on either way.
That's sort of how I stated that.
And no, he shouldn't be fired.
People ask me like, should be fired.
Like no, like why, you know?
And I'm remembering now you also said something along the lines of look.
I'm not really offended, but you may have offended other people.
Like you, you kind of took a stance for other vets that have been wounded especially now.
Is it been more grievously wounded than you?
That was the important line I had to walk on that entire reaction.
Because that's legitimate totally.
You can't kind of, you can't forgive the guy right off the bat.
You have to acknowledge that he was screwed up.
And, um, but on the other hand, you can also acknowledge that that he may have made a mistake.
Like he may have mispoke.
Like it may have been sort of ad libbed.
You know, because that is a very highly scripted show, but after working with Pete Davidson,
like he kind of goes off the rails sometimes.
And, uh, I mean, on the show or on the show.
In life, both.
Okay.
Obviously.
But, uh, you know, so it's like, you know, always that it's kind of going back to be still like,
is there a chance that there's more to this story?
Um, is there a chance I don't have to act like an agreed victim?
I don't feel like an agreed victim, so maybe don't act like it.
And so that gave, that gave SNL the space to invite me on the show.
If I had really stoked the outrage mob, um, why would they invite me on the show?
You know, because now now I've put them in a corner.
And, uh, so you can see this going that way.
And this is how it usually goes, right?
This kind of extreme sense of shame must be showed.
And the extreme sense of, or the extreme outrage results in an extreme sense of shame.
And so we've miscalabrated how we feel shame in this country.
And that's a problem for our culture.
Um, and, and the reason Americans liked the whole SNL moment with me and Pete was because it was the right balance.
So the right sense of shame is about finding the right balance of shame.
Because it seems like we have these like two options.
And I open up that chapter talking about all these politicians who,
who run headlong into failure and then like reemerge untouched or unrepent.
And there's a lot of examples like that, okay?
And I try to have bipartisan examples by the way.
Uh, because I did want this to be readable to people of other than, you know, my conservative fan base.
And, um, and the point is, is that, yeah, those politicians are bad people for basically feeling no shame.
At the same time, our culture has given them no incentive to feel any shame.
Because the outrage mob is so severe and so unrelenting and so on for giving.
That there's no incentive to actually react the way you should react.
And so you end up just not either not apologizing or apologizing profusely.
And like I actually, and the book actually, actually analyze this with some bell curves and graphs that I drew.
It's just like illustrate this visually for people.
So you just have to buy the book to see what I'm talking about.
Um, and what the point is is like, we need to get back to the middle ground where it's like,
I'm kind of sorry, but I'm not really sorry.
You know, and there's some good examples of that.
Like, I used to own the generous as a great example.
She took all this heat for like, you know, hanging out with George W. Bush at the Dallas Cowboys game.
She didn't apologize. She wasn't like, you know, I didn't, she could have done like the extreme.
Apology. I didn't realize how much pain I would cause the LGBTQ community.
She could have said that, right?
And you've seen other celebrities do similar things.
Like similar apologies. It's like, you've got nothing to apologize for.
Nothing.
And she didn't apologize. She just kind of explained it.
She got to just put people in their place.
Like, hey, like it's cool to hang out and be friends with people who you disagree with.
And that was it.
No, no, I do.
It was, it was, it was, it was, she diffused the situation rather, um, elegantly.
And, um, I used a couple of other examples of some good ones too.
But that's what we have to be aspiring to.
And, um, and we're not there right now.
And then it gets into the, the chapter gets into the individual sense of shame.
Because this is that that's the cultural problem we have.
That's the cultural outrage mob problem that I just described.
But there's a more individualistic sense of shame too about how you carry yourself through your daily life.
And, um, and how you have to feel bad about something if you're going to live your planet.
Like you have to know what it is and you have to understand right and wrong.
You can only understand right and wrong if you understand what you should feel shame about.
And then I, and I get again into kind of a religious discussion here about like our morality and like how we actually know right from wrong.
This is, this is a, this is a deep thing to understand and how you should feel bad about certain things.
If you're going to live the right way.
And then again, we, we do this meticulously in the seal teams.
I think I have a story in there about, um, just a debrief from a typical seal chief.
And how that went. You know, we thought we did good. No, you did it.
And you're going to feel bad about it.
And you have to make yourself feel bad about it.
And that's, that's, that's the, that's the psychological reason.
The psychological underpinnings of, of this chapter is, is you, a, a seal chief or Jaco can make you,
make you, no, you can, let, you can let them know that they screwed up right.
But the question is, do you feel bad about it?
Most team guys do. Most team guys like it's just, it's hard to, to feel like you screwed up.
But in the, in the outside world, that's not always the case.
A lot of people are thinking, whatever, I should be being trouble.
I was going to say, since I was in a position where a lot of times I was debriefing people and telling them that they screwed something up.
And the reactions were from a good, this is the difference.
You said, most team guys, good team guys go, ah man, I screwed that up.
I got to fix it. Bad team guys go, didn't really matter.
That wouldn't have, that would never happen real world.
I would, you know, like they've got a million excuses.
They don't take ownership of it, and they, and it just falls apart.
They feel, they feel, no shame.
Exactly. They feel like, it's not my fault.
It's, it's not on me.
And there's a rationalization that occurs.
And you have to, the only thing you can control is your conscious mind.
Because you can, you can control the conversation going on in your head about how you rationalize that.
And the more you rationalize it, the less likely it is that you actually feel the shame in your gut.
Because because at first you feel it, like you know it was your fault.
And you feel it, but then you rationalize it away.
And eventually that rationalization kind of takes over and you no longer even feel the shame in your gut.
And you're going out of very bad path at that point.
And again, this, this, this, try to relate this to a very basic stuff in life.
Like, like, don't you feel bad when you're that guy who kind of leaves the shopping cart in a parking spot?
Because you should.
Yeah.
You're a bad person.
Bad person.
You are.
Find a new one.
You're a bad person.
You are.
You know, you did it.
Yeah.
You know, you are.
You're out there.
Yeah.
You say in here, we should feel a sense of shame for not training hard enough for sleeping
in too late for eating that extra scoop of ice cream.
We should feel regret after walking by a piece of trash.
Next to storm drain knowing for where we'll go straight in the ocean.
We should feel bad for not tipping that hard working waiter.
We should be embarrassed when we owe a friend money and they have to constantly remind us to pay them back.
We should.
We should feel lazy for leaving our food tray on the table in a fast food restaurant, even though their trash cans are right there.
You go on.
You say we should be insured be accountable for everything you do.
It was why commander Jocca Willink echo Charles.
One of my mentors in the teams wrote an entire book on the subject called Extreme Ownership.
The premise of the book is quite simple.
Everything is your fault.
Be accountable.
Take ownership.
Take responsibility.
From this responsibility.
You will find freedom.
It is liberating.
Really is.
It's liberating.
The worst thing is trying to look and find who you're going to blame because then you don't have control over it.
When you say you know what this is my fault, then you are free to go and make changes in your life.
Free to fix things.
It's the deeper discussion about why personal responsibility is a bedrock of our cultural, of our culture and our cultural foundations.
As a conservative, we always say it.
I'm always like a personal responsibility.
In speeches, I try to delve into that a lot deeper.
This is the argument for why it matters.
It's quite simple.
Personal responsibility is empowering.
And lack of personal responsibility is disempowering.
The other issue is it's completely unsustainable for a society to engage in a lack of personal responsibility.
It's unsustainable because by definition, if you're not personally responsible, someone else must be responsible for you.
And that's fine if you're an infant or you're in the, you know, it's a small segment of society, right?
You can, you can, again, our, our government tries to take that into account.
But if you encourage the undermining of the foundation itself, the undermining of personal responsibility as a virtue in and of itself, which is what's happening on the left.
If you try to undermine that cultural foundation, you're creating an unbelievably unsustainable trajectory, where it is, where we, we have more and more people who are, who are convinced that somebody else should be responsible for them and therefore take their own power.
It's unbelievably disempowering and it's, it's just, you wouldn't wish that state of mind on anybody except your worst enemies.
You know, it's, again, it's not how you treat people you love.
It's one of those things that's tempting, right? It's short-term gratification.
It's, it seems like the easier way to go because in the short-term, hey, I just got this and I didn't have to work for it.
Yeah.
That's the short-term.
And unfortunately, we know where it ends up.
It's like a pyramid scheme.
Think about it.
I'm thinking of it. I'm getting paid or whatever, because someone got to do the work at the end of the day.
But a pyramid scheme, it's like everyone's waiting for their turn to like get, get.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
And then at the end of the day, everybody crashes because, oh, who's doing the work?
No, no, no, no, no, no, no.
I mean, you can't remember. We're not doing anything.
That's right.
I think that that first, second year.
Yeah, that's right.
My initial thought was trying to put it together, but yeah, you're right.
Because you're building it on everyone's going to get money.
Yeah.
So is the money?
It's the money coming from. It's basically the diffusion of responsibility.
This is what you're talking about and sort of the tragedy of the comments as well.
It's going to be a mix of all those things.
And it's not good.
It's unsustainable.
Next chapter, duty, a sense of duty.
My parents imbueden me a sense of duty to do that, which has inherent value.
You go on to say duty is ingrained in the human condition. Our great religious, our great religions are essentially based on a sense of duty to love God and live well.
We have a duty not only to survive in this world, but to pursue a higher purpose we are here for a reason.
And living for that purpose is our choice to make.
It is the path to happiness.
So again, we're starting to talk about the idea that you're going to find happiness in some short term gratification is not true.
And this chapter comes right after the sense of shame chapter because you have to understand what is wrong,
so that you can understand what is right.
And that is the darkness in the light and you have to live in both.
And sense of duty is, it's living your plan A.
You know, and I said, don't live your plan B, no plan B. Again, that, what I explained before that was about purpose.
That's about living with purpose. And so we get into a lot more detail about what that is in this chapter.
We talk about the great religions. We talk about why that's important.
And then it's a duty to live in the books about mental toughness. And so we bring it back into it's a duty to live with that fortitude.
And again, to feel bad, this is deeply intertwined with the sense of shame, to feel bad when you don't.
To understand what that duty is and how to live within it.
And I can't remember if I list the ten commandments in this chapter or the other thing in the different chapter.
Yeah, but it's the same kind of discussion.
Oh, no, right. It is this chapter. It is this chapter.
So then it's so that's when I get into a really long discussion about where our laws come from.
So this kind of goes into political philosophy as well.
And the fact is, is that the ten commandments are the origins of our law.
And I talk about how Moses, the portrait of Moses, is in the house of representative,
and the figure of the house. And along with 23 other law givers, but Moses is in the middle.
Moses is the only one who's not inside profile. That's important because he was the original receiver of law.
Not man made law, but like absolute law. These things are true.
Can't be argued with there. Just true.
All right. Like the commandments one through four basically say, these are true.
You can't argue with them. Like believe in God.
And the rest of them are like, this is what you should do.
And don't steal, don't kill, all that.
And an atheist could say, I know that.
Yeah, I don't need the Bible to tell me that I shouldn't do these things.
I know they're true. My counter to that is how do you know?
How do you know? I could tell you who taught them.
Where did they get them from? How do you know they're true?
And they can't answer that.
They're true because they do come from a higher power.
They're true because they come from thousands of years of wisdom.
And whether you believe in that higher power or not, you're still following it.
And you can't escape that reality.
If you try to, and if you start to believe that that human morality is changeable,
and that we can just choose that to change some of those commandments.
Well, then you get the Holocaust. Like it's a short path, man.
Like it's a short path to the horrors of the 20th century.
The secularism of the 20th century killed millions, tens and tens of millions.
And because we untethered ourselves from absolute morality.
It's a really dangerous path.
Yeah, when you talk about that and you end up saying at a very basic level,
this is back to book at a very basic level.
This is a shirking of fundamental human duty and responsibility,
a responsibility to what exactly, politeness, open-mindedness and grace for starters.
These are our duties to our fellow Americans.
Just the basics.
If we lose those fundamental virtues, we lose our sense of unity.
Without a sense of unity under unumbrella of common values,
this whole great American experiment unravels.
And as you just said, we've seen this before.
Common values, exactly, and they come from somewhere.
A large part of this book is about showing gratitude for your history.
Gratitude for what works.
I like to say that, again, just being a conservative conservatism is based fundamentally on things that work.
Not things that feel good, but things that work.
And that's important. You know, doesn't mean we're always right,
but most of the time, I think, at least the foundations are.
And you can't just undermine the foundations of a society.
And see that happening more and more, unfortunately.
You rattle off some of these duties. You have a duty to accomplish something every day.
You have a duty to live up to yourself, the person you want to be,
the hero archetype you admire.
You have a duty to embrace shame and learn from it.
You have a duty to be polite, thoughtful, patient.
You have a duty to overcome your hardships and not wallowing self-pity.
You have a duty to contribute.
Even if your contribution is small, you have a duty to be on time.
You have a duty to do your job.
Even if your job sucks, you have a duty to stay healthy both for yourself.
And so you do, so that you do not become a burden on others.
You have a duty to be part of the solution, not the problem.
In other words, don't join the Twitter mob.
You have a duty to try hard not to offend others and try harder not to be offended.
And this is where you start broaching into what I was saying earlier.
There is a selfish reason to live a life of purpose and responsibility.
It will make you tougher and more successful.
We are perfect and we won't always adhere to these basic duties.
But I hope we can start to agree on what they are, feel some shame and we fall short,
and begin living our lives with purpose.
This is the time-tested formula for stronger people and more than that, a stronger America.
This is what people miss sometimes.
And I talk about this a lot from a leadership perspective.
From a leadership perspective, if I'm a leader that tries to climb on people's back,
tries to make myself look good, tries to always shine the line line on myself
and find the best deal for myself.
If on that type of leader, I might get ahead for a second here there,
but ultimately I will not be in charge of anything.
If you're the type of leader that takes care of your troops, looks out for the good of the mission.
You look out for everyone above yourself.
If you're that type of leader, look, you might take hits now and again because you're propping up everyone else above yourself.
But in the long run, this is the amazing thing.
In the long run, you will absolutely be a more successful leader than me who's over here looking out for myself.
And that's a similar thing to what you're saying here, which is like if you do these things,
which seem like sometimes they be a pain, getting up every day and being on time, taking care of your health.
Like all these things, maybe you don't feel being polite to people.
Sometimes you just want to do what I want to do.
That ultimately taking care of yourself and putting yourself as the supreme cause of your life.
Ultimately, you will be less successful than if you take care of other people.
If you treat other people with respect, if you do your job, if you do those things that again on the surface,
they seem like they might not help you in the long run, you will absolutely win.
Absolutely.
And when you win, your team wins, your community wins, your country wins.
That's what happens.
Right.
And your individual actions and habits and tasks that are inherently good.
We have to, again, we have to redefine what good is because we've forgotten.
But that makes up the fabric of the larger culture.
And if we want a successful culture that is not at each other's throats and not losing our minds because of microaggressions and offenses,
then you've got to live within that. And yeah, treating other people to respect and doing things for others, again,
very basic biblical teachings that are unfortunately being swept away, especially in favor of a kind of the sense of grandstanding and sense of morality,
where it's more moral to demand that others do something for others.
You know, like that's, again, going back to the problems with socialism.
It seems to me that, because some socialists will sometimes say, well, Jesus was a socialist.
Now, Jesus encouraged you to be charitable with your time and your money.
Right.
That's what Jesus said.
He didn't say, stand on top of the hill, screaming that other people give away their money.
That's not, sorry.
That's just, you're missing deliberately misinterpreting the teachings of the Bible in favor of socialism.
There's a few other biblical reasons, I think socialism is not correct, but for our purposes on this chapter, that's a big one.
Sense of duty to give your time and your money and contribute that way.
And it will make you more successful in the long run, because building good relationships is a huge part of success.
We forget about that sometimes.
I've drawn Peter's, it goes into a lot of detail in that particular element, which is fascinating to get an easy, big fan.
And is he been on your show?
Three times.
He was on before he was on before he was kind of popular before 12 rules for life came out.
And then he was on two times after that.
And yeah, there are some of the most popular episodes of the podcast.
Until this one, of course.
Yeah.
Sure.
I'm sure.
100%.
Yeah.
It's interesting because a lot of people, they make that mistake.
How you're like, you have to have to do it.
Because people make that mistake with extreme ownership too.
Yeah.
But they're like, hey, if my boss would just get on board with this concept, you know, like, yeah,
that would be problems with my team would just take ownership.
Yeah.
We're not talking about the same field.
And same thing with relationships.
And I've been using the percentage lately of 99.9% of the things that I got done in the military.
And did in the military were based on relationships and not based on chain of command.
So every time one of my guys, you know, had a mission, I didn't, this is how you're going to do it.
And I was like, hey, how do you want to get this done?
Every time my boss came to me, they want to like, hey, John, this is what you need to do.
And they're like, hey, here's what we got.
What do you think?
Everything was about relationships.
Every, every, the extreme examples in the battle of Ramadi when we needed fire support from tanks who needed to risk their lives to go and get my guys,
prevent them from being overrun in the field.
Well, those tanks didn't work for me.
They didn't, they weren't totally separate chain of command.
And yet they would do it. Why?
Because we had awesome relationships up and down the chain of command.
And so yeah, absolutely relationship building is, it's, it's critical to every aspect of life.
And the little tagline that I often tell people is relationships are stronger than the chain of command.
100%.
Yeah.
Next chapter.
Do something hard.
In Buds, it's all about the next 10 minutes.
Sometimes it's about the next 30 seconds.
If you're thinking about Buds in its entirety, six brutal months, then the thought is simply too much.
The men who quit are the men who look up at the day before them and see all the days to come.
They are thinking, they're the men who are miserable.
And what end called and thinking about the hot coffee and the girlfriend they miss.
And suddenly, because they imagine the months long suffering, they will inevitably face they break.
They are already using every ounce of endurance and fortitude to survive what's happening right now.
Expanding their horizons to an infinite number of miserable right nows.
Does them in.
So you focus on the next 10 minutes and remind yourself that the instructors can't kill you even if they're claiming otherwise.
Thousands have made it before you.
You can too.
What's on the other side of those months and months of 10 minute blocks are over.
Liberation transformation and meaning.
So that's.
That's one way to get through Buds.
Buds isn't six months long.
It's about four minutes long.
Right now.
I want to get through it.
Lots of four minutes.
Lots and lots of them.
Or some longer for some of us if we extend our time by breaking a leg.
Some just not great, but also normal.
Yeah, normal.
A lot of people get rolled back.
They got to go back over and over again.
So how does this, how does this apply then to, you know, this is broad advice to human beings.
Yeah.
So because I have everybody's going through Buds and Norshad Day.
And obviously, I'm using my own experiences here.
Like this was my transformation.
Buds is a transformation for a lot of seals.
It's what gives us confidence and you push your limits so that you way pass what you thought were there.
So that your confidence enough to break past more limits when they come because they will come.
And, you know, they came for me getting blown up.
That was a limit that I didn't quite experience even in Hellweek.
And it got worse because things can get worse.
But Hellweek and Buds in general and the mentality that we developed, accordingly, at least allowed me to deal with it later.
And so doing something hard, it has a number of benefits.
One is kind of a simple sense of preparedness.
And the Stoics, a reference Stoics, Stoicism a lot throughout the book.
And the Stoics are referenced in this one because they, they believed in hardship as preparedness.
So that's a very, that's a very practical reason to just do hard stuff.
You know, if you're worried about being homeless one day, try to sit on the floor sometimes.
Like, try going a few days without the comforts of your home so that if it did happen, you'd actually be prepared for it.
That's a very simplistic way of looking at it, but like that's what they meant by that simple preparedness.
You know, if you want to be better at running up a mountain, run up a mountain like, you know, so the actor preparedness.
But there's a deeper reason why I think doing something hard matters.
And it's the, it's the psychology of suffering.
And so this is a chapter that has a lot of psych references in it.
I did a lot of research on this one specifically with kind of Dr. Allison from University of Richmond.
And the benefits of suffering are well documented.
Psychologically and physiological, physiologically speaking.
Interesting research that I, and we'll go into now, but because again, I want people to read it.
And all of the people who come away from this podcast, but check, got it.
You know, not buying that book now. Thanks, Jocco.
So there's a lot more to it, but the suffering has inherent value.
And we've, we've created the society where we try to avoid suffering and risk at all costs.
And there's, it's not self-evident that that's a good thing.
In fact, it's pretty evident that it's a bad thing.
We've become more fragile as a result.
And again, there's good research that shows like we've become kind of this,
this fragile culture. We need to be anti-fragile.
Heartship should make us stronger, not just that we're resilient to it, but that it actually makes us stronger.
This is fundamentally true.
Again, I think the, the Bible talks about this, the, or psychological research talks about this.
There's, there's evidence that, you know, again, physiological pain, you know, working out.
It changes your brain. It makes you better at memory.
And if you're better at, like, if your brain works better, I would argue that you're mentally tougher.
So like, just, again, so start lifting weights, you know?
And if you can't lift weights, like, find something else that is hard.
So again, it's not buds.
And I'm not saying, lift or trauma either, okay? Like swimming with sharks is hard.
Like, don't go swim with sharks. That's bad.
But, and, like, so I guess what I'm saying is, don't put yourself in a dangerous situation
where you'll have to live through a hardship and then overcome it.
Okay? That's not what I'm saying.
I am saying it has to be self-imposed and it has to be habitual.
And there's value in that.
And it could be simple, right? It could be taking a cold shower on weekends.
Like, I'm just going to, on weekends, I'm going to take cold showers.
It could be waking up at 4.30 a.m.
Sorry.
I could play.
Yeah. I hate that plan.
But, but that's, that's like, but that's, there's a reason you do it, you know,
and, and for the sense of discipline, you're on the path. Like, this is, this is what you do.
And it's different for everybody, but just find it.
And maybe make it harder the next time, you know?
But eventually, in your case, you would just be, never, I guess,
what would that look like wake up earlier?
No sleep.
Now you're just in the middle of the night.
You're just like, you know, it's weird.
I'm thinking about, um, there'd be sometimes with team guys on operations
where it goes, it goes past the normal everyday level of suck.
Like, it starts to suck bad.
Whatever it is, whether it's a long, long insert, you know,
patrol in, whether it's the heat, whether it's the cold, whatever that thing is,
like, you will be, uh, I would say, one out of every eight,
just standard kind of operations that you're going, one out of every eight.
You're going to have to go into that zone where you look around at the other guys
and you're like, yeah, you're like, you know, like, you're up.
This, everyone right here, everybody in this boat in this Zodiac,
that is absolutely freezing right now.
This sucks for everybody.
And you know what, it's just like, you're up.
We're going to keep going.
And it's like glorious.
And then you look back on it later and you're like, that was amazing.
And it makes you better.
And it, it, it, it, it, it, it, it, it, it, it, it, it, it, it, really, there's a spiritual awakening that occurs with suffering,
self-imposed suffering.
No doubt.
And, um, and, um, and, um, and also not self-imposed suffering.
I'm just saying, don't go seek out the, the, you know, what would be better to refer to as tragedy.
But yeah, I'm not saying seek out for tragedy.
But also, now, kind of, I would be jumping into the next chapter,
because sort of leads into it.
But then you're telling yourself a story about the tragedy.
And there's still value in that. And again, this is backed up by research.
Like, it, it did my homework on this.
There is, it, whether you call it post-traumatic growth,
or, or, or kind of positive, I forget the other terms.
But there's, there's a, there's a bunch of terms, like a lot of psychology terms that,
that, that, that prove and, and demonstrate that people,
not only become more resilient, but, but even stronger after really hard occurrences.
So don't run from it as a society we need to embrace it.
Yeah, I, no, no doubt in my mind. And we'll, let's jump to the next chapter.
But first, let me close this one out, because it's,
here's what you say.
In the raw humanistic sense, without suffering, there can be no internal resilience to adversity.
No proper preparedness for the future.
Suffering controlled by you and for the right cause can be a building block for both spiritual,
health and mental toughness.
In a liberty-based nation like the United States,
we are free to fail and to suffer that fortitude is a welcome and necessary attribute.
Rather than trying to erase suffering at every opportunity,
we would all be wise to value it and seek it out.
So go do something hard.
And so this next chapter, which you are just alluding to,
is called the stories we tell ourselves.
You say, you could tell the story of my life as a succession of hard times and heavy burdens.
You could tell it as an array of kicks to the head, interspersed with failures.
My mom died, my leg broke, my eye got blown out, my active commission got taken away,
my fellowship application got denied.
All these things are factually accurate.
They happened, I endured them.
That is where a lot of people would leave it.
These are things that happened to them from forces beyond their control,
leaving it here, leaving it there communicates a handful of ideas about someone.
He's unfortunate, he's unlucky, he's beaten, he's evictum.
That is not where people should leave it.
Stories about burdens born on their own omit the most important parts,
the responsibility of the individual.
The reaction of the individual, the growth and maturing of the individual.
The world does something to you because it will always do something to you,
but once it's done, that share of the story is over.
That is where your share of the story begins.
That's the point where the story stops being something done to you and starts being about you.
You go into, we talked about your mom dying, but you mentioned your leg,
you get in bloom.
There's a lot of things that you have a lot of what do you call him.
Hard times heavy burdens and failures that you talk about in the book that we haven't even touched.
Again, that's why people get the books that they can learn those lessons and see what you went through there.
But also see this, this is now getting towards the end of the book.
When you're starting to tie this stuff together and say, hey listen,
you were in a bad situation.
What are you going to do in the face of those bad situations more poignantly?
What is the story that you tell yourself?
Yeah, and in turn throughout this book is a particular thread about victimhood ideology.
And how that pertains to outraged culture.
I would argue that victimhood ideology is a tenant of outraged culture.
It's not surprising that you feel really mad and offended and angry and outraged if you also feel like you're oppressed.
If you also feel like you're a victim and you embrace that victimhood.
This isn't all that surprising either.
It's expected because going back to the hero archetypes, we've elevated victims.
Why would Jesse Smallet pretend and make up the story that he got attacked by two maga hat wearing guys and Chicago at 2am?
Why would he make that up?
Because we've elevated victims to heroes.
Like that's why why does Elizabeth Warren claim the lies that she's claimed about being Native American or that she was fired for being pregnant?
These are lies. They're well documented lies.
You know what's interesting is I'm just thinking of the, what's it?
Is it Jesse?
Jesse.
I'm thinking about that guy's story.
If you were to go back 20 years and someone was going to make up a story, the story that they would make up would be,
I got attacked by two guys and I kicked their ass.
Yes.
That's really important to me.
It's crazy.
The way I, but that's exactly what I'm talking about.
It's like that's our hero archetypes have shifted so wildly that the more likable story is getting your ass kicked and then complaining about it.
As opposed to like, no, I just whip their ass.
That's a perfect point to make and like, that's why I start the book with who is your hero because it's such an important concept.
And in this case, it's like, can I let you know who your hero is?
Well, then you should identify how you react to hardship.
Not saying hardship doesn't exist.
You know, when I bash victimhood ideology, I'm not saying there are no victims.
It is possible that you truly are a victim.
Absolutely.
But, you know, but one that should be defined, like in just the word injustice needs to be defined better so that we can overcome outrage culture.
And in just this doesn't mean things that aren't fair or things that you don't like.
Unfortunately, that's how the word is used all too often.
And just this means someone else is truly infringing on your rights.
Rights defined as life liberty and property.
And justice can be defined as is as is as you're due process being taken away.
Something some true unfairness or discrimination being implemented against you.
That can be defined as injustice, okay?
An outcome based on something other than your merit can be defined as an injustice.
But, but victimhood ideology really turns these, it really strains these definitions.
And I think people understand, know this intuitively.
Just watch the news and watch how people are reacting on social media.
This is a really big problem that prevents us from telling the right stories about injustice.
And then solving it and overcoming it.
We've been encouraged to live in the story of victimhood when something bad happens.
And that may feel good, again, it goes back to what you're saying before.
This sort of short term thinking, it feels good in the short term, right?
It feels like it's somebody else's fault.
And there's a comfort in that. There's like a warm blanket of self-pity that occurs.
Like that.
But it's also, it's, it's, you could almost say quite literally killing you because it leads you down this path of despair that ends in not a good place.
If you always feel this, your things are out of your control and your disempower and it literally cannot get better.
You cannot get better.
One of the questions that I get asked a lot when working with companies.
They'll say, you know, what's the biggest obstacle for having a culture of extreme ownership?
And it's really easy answer. The answer is that it is ego because when something goes wrong and you have to say,
Hey, this is my fault. Well, that hurts your ego.
And that's the biggest thing that people have to overcome.
Now, the other thing that that's interesting is, and you address this here.
So the other, the other question I'll get asked a lot when it comes to extreme ownership.
And I've kind of already mentioned it. You know, is, hey, if my kid gets sick, how do I take ownership of that?
If I get cancer, how do I take ownership of that?
If the market falls apart and we lose all of the money, I have to let people go,
how do I take ownership of the, of the market?
How do I take ownership of a natural disaster that occurred, right?
So there's, get, I get asked that question.
And the response is, you take ownership of how you,
how you respond to that occurring, right? When something bad happens.
And you, you, you, you go through the same thing here.
You say, even if I was not totally responsible for what happened,
I was still responsible for what would happen.
And this is after you got, after you got removed from the Navy.
Then they, they, they, they didn't kick you out of what they forced you to retire, right?
Yeah. They forced you retire. Look.
That, that, that's, that's just happening to you.
Like the big blue Navy is going, you're done.
Yep. And you can't control it.
And so how do you take ownership of that?
You, you take ownership by how you respond to that.
And what you say is you, trying to find your next mission.
Right. You can control the next step.
There's another important point here that I, that I lay out,
which is the way you describe your history.
This is important is putting yourself in the right psychological framework.
And we call those get to statements.
Like, I have to wear an eye patch or I get to wear an eye patch.
You know, because it looks cool.
So that's nice.
All right, get to wear the gold tried and tie.
Because it looks cool.
But you can go much deeper than that.
Like, I, you know, in, in some of the, to an extent,
this is self deception, right?
And, and you know that consciously going, going into it.
Like, in, because I use another example, like, well,
I, I have to pay my bills or get to pay my bills.
Because it shows that I'm an adult.
And I'm living responsibly.
I have to pay taxes or I get to pay taxes.
That one's harder.
That one's staying.
Especially if living California.
Yeah.
You guys all you do is pay taxes.
Yes, we do.
Well, you don't pay taxes.
And they're not even synchronizing the lights.
Because if you get to pay taxes, that means that you've made enough money.
Yeah.
To pay taxes.
So it's like, yeah.
It's like one way to do it.
And in a, in a, in a, in a different country, by the way.
Yeah.
I mean, it, it's, you know, fundamentally what you're doing there is finding the silver lining.
Because the finding the silver lining in a bad situation is fundamentally
about telling yourself a different story about that situation.
And so it's, it's not whistling past the graveyard.
If you already know it's not ignoring the actual hardship,
it's just forcing yourself to have the fortitude
to tell yourself the right story about it.
That's what the chapter is fundamentally about.
Yeah, it's one of those things.
You read through it and you go,
yeah, this is the attitude that you would want a kid to have.
You know, you close it out here 20 years ago,
I received a letter in the mail from Rice University.
The letter might as well have been addressed,
dear failure, because it was indeed a letter informing me
that my services were not required
at the prestigious school.
I failed to get in.
20 years later, I became the US congressman
who represents Rice University.
The path from that failure to my present day success
was not an easy one.
Many more obstacles and failures would present themselves.
Every day each against a small obstacle,
against each small obstacle, I had to tell the right story
in order to stay on the path through self fulfillment.
Failure like suffering has intrinsic value and worth
should we choose to confront it properly?
Otherwise, the ultimate story of success,
whatever that may be for you will never get told.
The other element here, I don't go into that much detail,
but it's an answer I give when,
especially kids ask how to deal with hardship.
And I like to point out that every obstacle is an opportunity.
And that sounds kind of cliche,
but it's really not, it's true.
I wouldn't be a congressman if I hadn't gotten my eye blown out.
This is true.
I would have stayed in the teams.
I never would have left.
I had no reason to leave.
It was not, I thought, very hard not to leave.
Best job ever.
Why would you leave?
Yeah.
And if I hadn't had been so many things,
I'd talk about, you know, gotten eye to this cool White House fellowship.
If I had gotten that, it wouldn't be a congressman.
You know, so technically that's a failure,
but, you know, you also, also it's not.
When did you go for that fellowship?
Right after Harvard.
Or Harvard was right after the Navy for one year,
applied for that, didn't get it.
You applied for the White House fellowship?
Right.
And you didn't get it.
Didn't get it.
And then you're like, okay, cool.
Can't beat him join him?
Well, no.
So, Rand for Congress,
because now I control the funding for the White House fellowship.
Yeah.
That's right.
Naval Academy didn't like it.
I guess it was.
It actually can't join him beat him.
Yeah, I definitely didn't join them.
Don't break your go.
You didn't get it in the Naval Academy either.
No.
Didn't get it into the Naval Academy.
Rejected.
I'm not going to defund the Naval Academy.
But.
But no, I didn't get in.
And what if I had?
I don't know.
Maybe I wouldn't have even made it to buzz.
You know, you could argue, you know,
just different selection process.
Like there's all these.
You want to hear a little story that I tell myself,
whenever I get some kind of like little injury,
even if it's like a more significant injury,
maybe something that's going to make take me out of
off my training schedule for a month, right?
Her, my knee, her, my shoulder or something.
I always tell myself that that was
the greater powers way of getting me to not train
because the next day I was really going to get her.
Yeah.
The next day I was really going to.
That's all.
So I'm just like, OK, cool.
That's God's way of telling me, I'm not supposed to train
right now because otherwise I was going to break my neck
or something.
So we're just going to.
That's right.
That's the story.
I tell myself sometimes.
I think it's a, I mean, it's not a joke.
I think it's a real.
I believe in that kind of stuff, honestly.
I believe that some things happen for a reason.
It's up to you to actually react to it appropriately.
But I don't know.
I actually do believe in that.
And I think that comes out in this chapter.
So next time.
All right.
Next chapter, you went from the personal story.
Now we're talking about the story of America.
This is chapter 10.
The individual stories we tell ourselves, not just about our hardships,
but about who we are, combined to create our American story.
Every one of us adds a small thread to the larger fabric of our culture.
And as we change and evolve, so do our cultural norms.
The American story itself evolves.
This isn't a bad thing either.
It is natural and constant throughout history.
But something is changing for the worse.
The American story itself is being threatened.
Our cultural fabric has often changed and evolved,
but it has never been irreparably torn.
The close to we ever came was a civil war.
I suggest you that the latest threat to our American story
is outrage, culture, identity politics, and victimhood
ideology that it elevates.
The threat is born of small beginnings as big threats.
So often, it starts with toxic personal narratives,
wrapped in cheap cloth of victimhood, always looking to an external
culprit to blame for real or perceived injustices.
So this is the direction you fear that we are heading right now.
I think we're there.
So pessimistic.
Well, it's just, well, I'll tell you one thing.
I don't need to talk to you, right?
Well, I was going to say, I was just like when I was with Ben Shapiro.
And I just went up and talked to Candace Owens.
And they live at Ground Zero for interacting with crazy people.
I mean, and you're not quite as big.
It becomes all you see and you get a little bit more pessimistic.
Exactly.
And I'm really lucky because I work with a bunch of different companies,
all over the country, and work with every different type of company,
and work with all levels inside of a company.
So I'm not just out there only talking to the CEOs and the C-suite.
I'm also out there talking to frontline troops, communicating with them,
talking to what problems they have.
So we really get to see everyone at National Front.
We really get to see the pulse of not only of America over a large span,
but at a bunch of different socioeconomic levels,
and in a bunch of different industries.
Whereas, I mean, Candace and Ben, like, they go to,
they go to speak at colleges.
That's kind of what they do.
You know?
And you're not going to run into the same type of people,
but I'm going to run into that's working on a construction site
or in a manufacturing plant in Iowa.
No, you're sure not.
I do the same thing.
I've been pleasantly surprised to be perfectly honest with you.
Even when I go to colleges and especially high schools,
I think the questions are good.
If there's disagreement, it's been good.
Yeah, actually now that you mentioned,
I go and talk at colleges sometimes too.
And you mentioned, you know, you were talking about the kind of crowd
that comes in to see, the kind of crowd that comes in to see Candace Owens
or Ben Shapiro.
Sure, there's people that want to see them
that have like a concerned viewpoint,
but they probably attract at least as many
if not more lunatics.
They do.
And it's, I've seen it happen less over time,
also because Ben and Candace and Charlie Kirkday
that is kind of what they're looking for
because they want the debate to happen on camera.
I personally enjoy it too.
Like I want people in the left to come and debate me.
And I'm going to, that's what I want.
It's one of the reasons I'm doing it.
If it's just a bunch of people there agreeing with me,
then I'm not making a lot of progress.
It's really just a rally at that point.
And there's value in that too, but we are going there
for the confrontation.
I just wanted to be respectful and fact-based.
And it's not always that way.
I've had some interesting experiences
where it's just it just devolved into emotional ramblings.
But I've felt so that's some really interesting public debates.
And like that's kind of a usual for a politician to do.
See, that's the Candace Owens and Ben Shapiro model.
It's unusual for a politician to do
because we can get in so much more trouble doing it.
Because it's dangerous.
It's, you don't know how that's going to go.
People setting up ambushes on you have got your moment.
Right.
And so just be prepared for it and you'll be fine.
Know what you're talking about.
So I do it.
But I enjoy it quite a bit.
So the back to the original question,
which is, are we there as a culture?
Any answer is kind of like, it's worse than it used to be.
How about that?
Whether we're in a disaster area right now
with respect to victimhood ideology and identity politics.
That could be debated forever
and it kind of depends on what your standard is.
You know, like, whoa, what does it look like
to be over the edge on that?
Like, I'm not sure.
I just know it's worse.
I just know it's gotten a lot worse.
And other reference Jonathan Height quite a bit
in this book, one of my favorite authors.
And his book, The Coddling of the American Mind,
is a great read.
If you're really looking to examine how this evolved
on college campuses and they can really examine it
down to the year, about 2013, which
and then they examine all the reasons for this,
the sort of outreach culture.
And even then, though, they point out,
it's mostly at the coastal elite institutions.
It happens a lot less on other college campuses
where less in the reality is most college kids
just want to get drunk and get through their next class.
And they're not super hyped up about politics.
Social media, the fact, and those of us who live
within the world of social media
also makes us believe that it's a lot worse than it really is.
And you have to remove yourself from that.
And so you won't seem to be using examples
in this book of people on social media.
You'll seem to be using examples from leaders in our country.
And big media companies like The New York Times,
really pushing these narratives.
So I'm not getting my evidence for this problem
from random commentators, even if I could count thousands
of them, because it's like what are thousands?
A tiny, tiny little, little, little, little
beauty fraction of the United States.
What matters is the leaders and how that's changed over time.
So that's why I come at this and I say,
there is a real problem here and we're there
because our leaders are talking like this.
Like this is a bigger movement than just some idiots
on Twitter.
It's bigger than that.
And so that's why I'm not going to be
I think it's such a, because if I couldn't find those
examples, then I would argue that,
yeah, maybe I'm over blowing it.
But the victimhood ideologies is it's here.
And I could, from what you just read,
the argument I'm making there,
unless you were going to go on to something else.
Go ahead.
See the argument I'm making there is that there's a series
of steps that have led to this moment
where we're trying a different story about America.
And I give an analysis of how it's victimhood ideology
that's created this.
There's a lot of elements, but victimhood ideologies
are big one.
It's because it first starts small.
As I know there, it's a small beginnings
where you're blaming somebody else,
like maybe it's your platoon commander,
who just didn't see the value in you,
the way they should have.
Which by the way, if you talk to modern military commanders
as they problem with a younger generation,
like they're seeing these differences in how it is to manage troops.
It's just different.
It's not the same.
Like I came into the seal teams thinking,
okay, I have to, I feel like I have to earn my way here.
Newer, maybe team guys may be not team guys,
but definitely in the military.
Newer troops are thinking like they're owed more
than, or they're,
the organization itself has a duty to them,
but not the other way around.
Like a duty to give them more responsibility
and leadership or whatever,
but they haven't quite earned it yet.
More status, but without earning it yet.
This is something when I talk to leaders,
I'm curious what your perception is on this
because you talk to so many corporate leaders
and how it is to manage the different generations.
I don't know what that's like.
Not only corporations,
but also still talking to military troops
and there's always people,
well, this is a question that I get asked all the time.
And it's, you know, what's wrong with my team?
And you can probably guess how I answer that.
This is leadership problem.
And one of the things I fall back to all the time,
so I don't know that I can think of a more difficult
workforce to deal with than being,
than dealing with draftees in Vietnam,
in Vietnam more.
People that did not believe in the cause
did not want to do the job and in doing the job,
their life and limb was at risk.
You cannot think of a more difficult workforce
to try and deal with.
So I've read many, many, many, many books
about Vietnam.
I've interviewed many Vietnam veterans, leaders,
and troops.
And here's the deal.
Good leaders, good leaders.
And my first example is Colonel David Hackworth,
who's like my personal mentor,
he might never met him, but I read his book many times
and all of his books many times.
But when he talks about the draftees
and he was in Korea and he was in Vietnam,
he's a battalion commander, Vietnam.
He was one of the most decorated guys ever.
And when he would talk and he was a complete lifer,
this guy worshiped the army.
He was in the military since just 15 years old.
He was all he ever knew.
And when he would talk about his draftees
and when he talks about him in his book about face,
he loved his draftees.
And he loved his draftees because guess what?
They would call bullshit when they didn't think he was
making a good call.
They would give him pressure against what he was saying to do
if it didn't make sense.
They would test him.
They would push back.
And as a leader, he thought that's exactly what I want.
That's exactly what I want is,
I don't want people, I don't want to bunch of robots.
I had one of his company commanders on the podcast
who retired as a general.
Mook, Mookayama, general Mookayama,
fantastic guy.
And I asked him and he was a company commander, Vietnam.
And I said, what?
Because this question I hear all the time,
I said, you know, sir, what did you think of your draftees,
in Vietnam?
And he said, I really couldn't tell who was a draftee
and who wasn't.
And so then you read author books and what it boils down to is,
and most of the books that are read are like interviews
with people.
And if you have leaders that are not good leaders,
guess what they do, they complain about the draftees,
about how they push back, they didn't follow orders.
People like William Callie in charge of the MII masquer.
What did he say?
He hated draftees.
Because he's a shitty leader.
And so when you talked to me about a millennial,
the characteristics of a millennial,
hey, they think they deserve stuff,
they want to know why they're doing what they're doing,
they want to have ownership of stuff,
they think they deserve to be in charge of stuff.
And I'm like, bring me that new guy.
I'll take that new guy any day of the week.
And I'll take that new guy and be like,
okay, you want to run stuff, you want to know why you're doing
what you're doing?
Absolutely, you deserve that.
That's decentralized command,
you need to know why you're doing what you're doing.
Perfect.
You want to take ownership of stuff?
Absolutely.
You think you should be in a higher elevated position.
Good, let's get you there.
So we can always complain about the junior generation.
The freaking kids and the teams right now are way better
than I was when I checked in as a new guy,
are you kidding me?
They're way better.
They're tough bastards too.
It's not like they're just more tech,
you know, some people will say,
well, you know, the new generation's more tech savvy.
It's like, yeah, they are.
And their tough is hell.
So when we start talking about what the problem with is
with our troops, what a good leader does is says,
okay, there's these, I need to treat this guy with,
I need to make some maneuvers here
to get this person on board with the program
because it's not like some young army guys,
like I don't want to do a good job.
It's not like some person at a tech company,
some person that just graduated from college
and went to a tech company's like, you know what,
I don't want to do well here.
Like no, they want to do well.
Now they might have some high visions of themselves.
Cool, who's job is to put those visions in the check?
Who's job is to explain them, listen man,
I'm glad you want to step up and run everything.
That's awesome.
Let me ask you this.
Do you even understand how this,
you know, how the economy of our businesses working right now?
To explain this, here, look at this spreadsheet
and explain what this means.
I have no idea, okay, cool, let's get you educated on this.
Let's get you to learn this because you know what?
I do want you to elevate.
I want you to take over this company.
That's fine.
But you've got to learn this stuff with you.
So as a leader, we've got to look at people
and this again, this happens all the time
and it happens within one puttune.
You know, I guarantee you had guys in your puttune
that thought they knew everything
and you had some guys that were like happy to be here
and they're just humble.
You get all these guys.
You get all these guys and is there some
little difference in the generations?
Sure, there's always difference in the generations.
No freaking generation was just always mine, right?
We always hear that, you know, the guys
when I got to the teams, it was like the guys
from the 70s were like, oh, the guys from the 80s are weak.
And then the guys from the 80s said the guys
from the 90s were weak.
Like let's just keep going.
How do we reflect things as a leader?
Make adjustments.
When if my team is not performing well,
I'm a hundred percent responsible for it.
If my team has a bad attitude,
And I'm going to get it fixed.
That's what I'm going to do.
I'm responsible for doing that.
Yeah, that's a very nuanced look at this.
I'm always asking this question because I'm
a animal millennial, you know?
It's hard to generalize a generation.
You just can't, but you have to.
There are stereotypes exist for a reason.
So it's good for analysis to try and figure that out.
And I don't know.
I don't know where I fall on it.
Because I see the, I do see some bad aspects.
And you know, wanting more responsibility was maybe the wrong thing
to hit on as a negative attribute.
That's obviously a good thing.
But sometimes it's accompanied by a,
a not so humble belief that somebody is victimizing them
and preventing them from moving up because of some kind of oppression.
And that's.
And if I get someone like that on my team,
who's responsible for fixing that attitude?
I can promise you right now.
We'll play the question game all day long.
And I do this with every level leadership.
I have people coming, you know, my team's all jacked up.
OK, cool.
Who's in charge of your team?
Well, yeah, that's right.
You are.
Or someone will say, my front line troops aren't doing what I'm doing.
Oh, who's in charge of your front front line troops?
It's Bill.
OK, who's in charge of Bill?
Mike, who's in charge of Mike?
Me.
That's right.
You're responsible for what's going on down there.
And if there's attitudes that you don't like,
man, you're responsible for it.
You are absolutely responsible for it.
And if you're a good leader, you can get those attitudes
to shift in the right direction.
And generally, by doing exactly what we're talking about.
When, and you and I were having a conversation earlier,
it's like, if they understand why these decisions
are being made or why they actually need to learn
some of these front line jobs before they can move up the chain
of rent, if they understand that they have a path
for mobility to increase their pay and increase their
responsibility inside of an organization,
they'll go, OK, well, thank you for telling me that.
And now I'm going to go get after it.
As opposed to Millennial suck.
And I can't deal with Millennial.
It's like, OK, cool.
Yeah.
I mean, I guess that's why I wrote the book, right?
Because because I do see these things as problems.
And I don't see them in my team.
My team's great.
And they're Millennials or younger.
So obviously, something is working there.
Maybe that's because I hired the right people with the right
temperament.
I don't know.
And who's in charge of doing that?
Well, Nate.
Exactly.
So when you meet someone that says, oh, I got these horrible people
on my team.
Have you tried to fix them?
Yeah, but I can't fix them.
Well, hey, who's fault is that?
Who actually hired these people in the first place?
If you sit down with someone and you interview them or you hire them
and then they're horrible and they have a horrible attitude and they don't want
to be a part of the team, great.
You're not going to be a part of my team.
Yeah.
You're not going to be a part of my team if that's what you bring to the table.
And so this book, I think, is like what I'm trying to do is look at it
in a broader cultural problem.
Because it is.
It is.
And then try to give lessons to fix it.
Because for all the reasons you just stated, it's like it's, we have to take
ownership of our culture as well.
It's not just ownership of our team that we can, you know, you should,
of course, and that you can control a lot when you're leading a team.
But we've got to come together as a culture and be better.
Because as a part you read, as an individual, you're an individual
threat in the larger fabric of society.
And our culture is being transformed and not in a good way.
And I hope the problem isn't as bad as I kind of make it out to be.
But, you know, worst case scenario, I'm wrong.
And things are going on in a great direction.
Well, even I wouldn't say worst case scenario you're wrong.
I mean, clearly there are indicators of what you're talking about.
And as you said, you're not talking about people on Twitter.
You're talking about mainstream media organizations that
proceed in this direction.
And the analysis, because I went on off on a tangent talking about
millennials and management issues with them.
So the analysis I go into is it goes something like this.
You believe in a victimhood ideology.
Believe that somebody else is to blame, maybe it's your team,
maybe it's your boss, maybe it's your parent, maybe it's your teacher.
Whatever it is, somebody else is fault.
Okay.
You're in that, you're living that story about yourself individually.
That is expanded.
It's expanded to groups.
It's expanded to this sort of group on group identity politics.
And that my fate is tied to an immutable characteristic that is tied to a group.
Maybe it's race, maybe it's gender, maybe it's socioeconomic in nature.
And by consequence, there is another group of pressing my group.
Okay.
So it's group on group politics.
This is identity politics to the courts.
It's the promise of more power from one group to another.
Okay.
You're telling somebody there, a victim, and you're telling them that you're the champion of them against the oppressors.
So that's the next thing.
Then it evolves even more than that.
It evolves into these kind of institutional conflicts.
And so it's not just a group that's oppressing you.
That group is tied to a broader institution.
Maybe that institution is the church.
Maybe that institution is some kind of cultural institution.
Maybe it's a merit, maybe it's a meritocracy.
That's me that's an institution.
This notion that we compete based off of merit and that your reward is tied.
To how well you perform or your talent.
The meritocracy is an important institutional construct in our culture.
Okay.
There's other institutions too.
Like the Supreme Court.
Okay.
When you're talking about packing the Supreme Court,
you're talking about tearing down an institution.
So there's government institutions.
There's cultural institutions.
There's social institutions.
The word institution is malleable in that sense.
And it should describe a kind of a cultural friend.
Kind of a cultural framework that we operate in, I think.
Those come under attack.
You know, because it's the institution's fault.
I talk about Thomas Sol, he's an economist and Hoover Institute and Stanford.
Amazing, amazing thinker and author.
He talks about how the French Revolution was laid by Russo.
It was based on this idea that the natural state of things involved no suffering.
But that it is institutions that cause suffering.
That's a really interesting concept.
It's like this belief that life is actually,
it is not natural in life to be oppressed or to go through suffering.
It is not natural.
It is natural.
It is the unnatural institutions.
Man made institutions that created your suffering.
Therefore, we must revolutionize those institutions.
Terror them down and build our utopia.
This was how the French Revolution happened.
This is how 17,000 people were dead in the next few years from the terror that ensued.
It is the thinking that led to Marxism and the horrors of the 20th century.
This isn't all that controversial statement to make.
It's just kind of how it happened.
That is how the progressive left thinks as well.
It comes from somewhere.
Progressiveism has a history, just like conservatism has a history.
It is a history based on this kind of your feelings are correct.
If you feel something it must be right.
And you should.
And the injustices against you are always man-made.
And they're always coming from an oppressor.
They're never a natural part of life.
Therefore, government is there to fix those institutions.
That's why you must proceed with the revolution.
This is the thinking that occurs.
So that ends up, once you've turned down the institutions,
there's another ultimate oppressor and it's the American founding itself.
That's the story of America that keeps getting told.
And that worries me a great deal.
We didn't use to fight about that.
The left and the right did not fight about the story of America.
The way we're fighting about it now.
And it's become this question of whether America was even founded on anything good at all.
That's the story being spun.
And it stems from this individual victimhood identity politics.
And again, I'm not making this up.
I'm not because I'm looking at major leaders that say these kind of things.
You know, I quote, Beto.
I quote, Ilhan Omar.
America was founded on genocide, not that America committed genocide.
That would be an accurate statement.
But America was founded on it.
That implies a very different meaning.
Saying that white supremacy is a problem is a true statement.
Saying we were founded on it.
That's a different implication.
You're in dating the American founding itself.
So what does that lead to?
Well, it leads to popularity with burning the American flag.
Please, the popularity with kneeling for the national anthem.
It leads to popularity with with with with attacking the pledge of allegiance as an institution and an of itself.
It leads to it leads to the New York Times public, you know, the New York Times prioritizing a message that America is just okay.
On the Fourth of July, like it leads, you know, I open up in this chapter talking about the New York Times going after the Apollo 1158th anniversary.
Basically praising the USSR instead of America on this day.
It's like, why is that? Why is that the reaction?
Because there's there's need to tear down the institutions of America at its core.
Why is that?
Well, because you need to tear something down at its core if you want to implement the revolutionary utopia that you envision.
So this is the most political chapter by far, right?
This is where I really delve into the differences, like the real deep differences between conservatism and progressivism.
Because I announced conservators a little bit on this too, as far as the victim put ideology goes.
Like it's a different form of ideology, it's a different form of victim put, but it occurs.
And it occurs up to the limits of tearing down institutions.
Okay, conservators have a very inherent distrust of government institutions.
Like sometimes to a to a conspiratorial degree.
But we stop way short of actually bashing the founding of America.
And then the solutions to this problem, which is what I really end the chapter with,
I make a very strong argument for against, against progressivism as a solution to these problems.
Mostly because progressivism at its heart is a promise to end your suffering.
And that is an inherently dishonest promise to make.
For the reasons I just say again, that's the basis of the French Revolution.
We can end your suffering because it's man-made.
It's not natural.
The natural state of things is for you to live in a wonderful utopia,
prancing around in the trees or whatever the heck they're imagining.
It doesn't make any sense because it's not real.
And so to tell somebody that you will and they're suffering to tell them that you can replace God with government.
Because what is what is religion fundamentally?
It's like that Jesus took on the crucifixion and the passion of the Christ is about
him taking on the suffering.
There's a spiritual element to this.
And that can't be replaced by a government ideology.
Fundamentally, it's basically a progressiveism attempts to promise people.
And I'm also trying to define what I mean by the progressive movement,
very carefully in the book because I don't want.
There's a lot of people who identify as progressive because they just got back from a gay wedding.
Or they like to smoke some pot.
Or they like tattoos or whatever.
Or they do yoga.
Like, I define that very carefully as social progressivism in the modern sense.
And that's just not what we're talking about here.
I'm talking about the deeper underlying politics and history of the progressive movement
and what it's fundamentally promising people.
Talking about the role of government in your life.
And because, again, I want to be readable to a lot of different people.
But this is the most political chapter by far.
You know, one thing that speaking of the tattooed yoga, whatever person,
I was a really rebellious kid, right?
And I think at some point there's going to have to be like a, like a,
Republican with a Mohawk and face tattoos.
That's going to come out and say, like, hey,
I have face tattoos.
I like whatever genre of underground subculture music.
I don't want to conform to anything.
And the best way to live that life is to actually support conservative values
because conservative values support individual freedom.
And that's what I believe in.
And I think that's what's going to get some of these,
because let's face it, an 18-year-old kid wants to be rebellious.
Why?
Because they trying to get out of the house, they're trying to show their dad,
they don't need him anymore, they're trying to show their mom, they don't need him anymore.
So I'm going to get a Mohawk and I'm going to tattoo him, my neck,
and I'm going to move forward into the world.
And other kids look around and go, okay, that's how we're rebelling.
But at some point, you go, actually, it just blows my mind that people say,
you know, you go up to anyone and say, you know,
do you want the government to be in charge of anything?
You go up to someone with a Mohawk and whatever.
No way, man.
And then you go, cool, why would you vote for the government to be in more charge of more of our lives?
I just don't think that connection gets made off of enough.
No, it doesn't, and I deal with this often and since I talked to most not mostly,
but I'm a politician who does a lot more youth engagement than most politicians do.
And so I address this directly.
Like, how do you, as a conservative young person,
how do you make the case for conservatism to your fellow young people who kind of live by this kind of libertarian?
I mean, what you described is sort of libertarian.
An extra rebellious libertarian.
These people who kind of live by this notion of, you know,
social, progressivism and freedom, but fundamentally, they believe in a kind of Republican form of government that is out of your life and, you know,
fiscally responsible, you know, they live by this mantra, well, I'm socially liberal but fiscally conservative.
Right? That's what people say.
And then they vote Democrat, 100%.
Like, almost 100% of the time. So it's, it's a mantra that makes them feel good,
but it doesn't mean anything to them.
And, um, I mean, delving into this is like my life's work at this point.
Yeah, I feel so unfair.
And so I'm so glad I don't have to talk about this stuff all the time.
I'll do it once a year with you.
Yeah, it's, but it's a super interesting thing.
And you're like, like, why, why is your entire vote, your entire vote on a political party,
based on the abortion issue?
I mean, it doesn't make sense.
It's not a rational decision. I'm sorry. It's just not.
Especially because that issue will not affect you, you know, because people will say this and they've got like three kids.
And they're like, well, and they would never get an abortion themselves.
It's like, well, this doesn't affect you at all.
You know, you can make a pretty good argument.
This should be decided at the state level.
And yet you are voting 100% because of this issue at the federal level.
This is not a rational decision.
And, um, or, or, or, or, or, or, or, or game marriage.
It's like, it's, that's definitely not a rational decision.
Considering it's not even argued about anymore.
Like, that's the Supreme Court's done with that one.
So, it doesn't, you know, it's, it's really surprising, um, to see how people think about these things.
Um, and, and, and so I guess, bringing it back to the book.
My point is I'm trying to distinguish there.
I'm trying to distinguish this into a role of like what, or, to a conversation about what government is actually for.
And how that manifests into victimhood ideology,
how that manifests into the story about America because, again, I can,
I can make it, it's a very short path from victimhood ideology and, and America as an oppressor to hatred of America itself.
And I only, I only quote the big ones.
I only quote, you know, Taylor Swift because she's a cultural icon.
You know, and she's out there saying, if you're not a cisgender white male,
your rights are being stripped away.
That's a Taylor Swift quote.
That's an amazing thing to say from one of the most successful prosperous people in the world.
Why would she believe that?
Like, what is happening that she believes this thing, that is so fundamentally not true,
that is so easy to, to debunk.
Why would she believe this? Why did AOC believe,
because she, because that's the next one I quote,
which is like, oh, what did she say?
My generation is never known American prosperity.
How does that make any sense?
I mean, it, it, it only makes sense in this context where it's good to be really insane.
Yeah.
It, it only makes sense when you understand that the goal is to elevate victimhood.
And then they use that, and then they use that to tear down the story of America itself.
And it's, it's such a dangerous path that we're on,
that we want to revolutionize the foundations of our prosperity,
to such an extent. And again, the only way to justify the only way to make people believe that their eyes are lying to them,
that all the good things around them are just lies.
The only way to make them believe that is to constantly,
it's to constantly hammer them with this crisis narrative,
with this false narrative that people are trying to oppress them,
or there's other people being oppressed, and you've never met them,
but guess what? It's happening.
And if you don't, and if you don't raise your fist against the injustice,
then you're part of the problem.
You win your white privilege.
This is happening in such an extreme level.
You know, and it's, again, the good news is,
is like people listening like, well, I haven't seen it.
And look good. That's good. But it is happening.
Yeah, no, I mean, we've got to be aware.
Like you said, there's evidence, big evidence from real players out there
that that preach this and live this sort of life.
It's kind of interesting, man, because we, on this podcast,
very seldom talk about politics at all.
And yet, people kind of know where I stand,
and they kind of, you know, just, it's all good.
Well, like you said, it is a real thing.
That is going on. It is a problem.
And that's one thing that I would say is very nice about your book,
is that it is a, first of all, it explains it.
And it gives some pretty good answers on how to move forward.
And one of the things you do is you, you close out with,
with an American ethos.
Yeah.
Set, you set forth an American ethos in the book.
Or what I think you called a draft or, you say,
perhaps it goes something like this.
And you spell it out.
Preciate forward.
Nothing that really anybody would sensibly argue with.
Right.
You know, nothing that you could really sensibly argue with.
And I'll let people get the book and read it.
But, you know, the last line of it is, you know,
I will live with fortitude.
You know, name of the book is fortitude.
That's sort of the last line of the American ethos that you put forth.
And that's a simple statement, right?
It's a simple statement, but it's something that you can actually carry with you
in every part of your life.
And the way you tie fortitude into all these other aspects of,
how to deal with other people, how to react to things.
That is what the book is about.
And it really sets forth a,
a great path for people to go down to get their themselves,
their family, their country into a more stable and productive and better place.
So, I've read, I'll just tell you a fraction of the book today.
Whoever, what you should do is order this book right now.
Now, here's something that you haven't ran into yet, Dan.
You're publisher.
Your publisher is, first of all, they're underestimating you.
They're underestimating the people that want to hear this message.
So, they're only going to print X amount of books.
They're looking at pre-sales.
They're like, okay, we're only going to print X amount of books.
Because it's investment.
It's a risk for them.
And then what happens is, the book comes out.
People start to read it.
It catches on fire.
And then all of a sudden, there are four weeks out from printing more books.
So, what people need to do right now is pre-order the book.
Pre-order the book.
Which makes the publisher then print more.
Also, I should note, all pre-orders are getting a signed book plate.
Oh, all of them.
Ouch.
Yeah, my hand hurts.
Yeah, that's not fun.
So, what do the book write now?
We'll have it on our website so you guys can click through and order it.
Well, I need to clarify that.
You have to go to dancrenchabbook.com slash pre-order to upload your receipt so that we know you pre-order it and can actually get you the book plate.
You know what?
If you do that, you get the book plate.
I've been putting out that website pretty calm.
Yeah, cool.
I'm going to take this as a personal challenge to see if I can break you.
Get so many freaking pre-orders that you have to sign book plates for leg.
I love this.
This, I mean, do something hard.
You know, sign one million book plates.
Do something hard.
That is nasty.
Really?
You actually have a podcast now.
Your own podcast, which is called Hold These Truths.
Yeah.
Tell us about that podcast a little bit.
So, I'm always looking for ways to communicate.
It's my job.
I've got to communicate the truth and the policies that I believe are right.
And the things we're voting on in Washington.
So, I do that a ton on social media as everybody knows that.
And there's, there's, you know, there's a different method of communicating for every platform.
And one thing that you can't do on Instagram and Facebook and Twitter is have really lengthy conversations and deep dives into policy issues.
So, I do that on the podcast.
And, you know, it started because I'm like, you know, I get these five-minute conversations during hearings when I have a really interesting witness come and talk about something.
And maybe I'll meet with that person later, too. And it's a really interesting conversation.
And I ask some, you know, questions that I need answered.
Why don't we record that?
Why don't we dive into these things?
And so, what you'll find from that podcast is a whole variety of issues.
You know, one day it'll be about Iran or China.
Another day it'll be about student loans.
I've interviewed the previous head of the ACLU.
We'll talk about free speech.
We'll talk about, you know, discrimination law.
Make sense in these conditions.
Like, there's some really fascinating deep dives.
We'll talk about 5G.
We'll talk about Bitcoin.
I mean, a whole variety of things.
Medicare for all, the environment, the green-new deal, all of this stuff.
And we're talking to actual experts on the subjects.
I'll say that your job gives you access to people that actually know what they're talking about.
Yeah. They'll come and talk to me.
And are you bringing on people that you don't agree with?
Well, I've gotten into debates with some for sure.
Especially head of the ACLU.
We probably could do more of that.
It just started.
So I'm trying to build up a library right now of just deep dives into certain policies.
Or I'm kind of just asking the questions.
Because, you know, the way we went at this podcast,
too, is like, I don't have time to prepare for it.
And I'm too busy to take the time to really prepare a podcast the way you are preparing your podcast.
Each time.
It's not feasible for me.
What's more feasible is that I'm just a genuinely curious person talking to another person who knows a lot of things.
That I can take an hour out and do.
And I think it ends up being pretty good.
Yeah.
And so, you know, we haven't had a full-on debate on a podcast yet.
And haven't figured out how I would even structure that if we were to.
Because I debate on my public life so often.
It's like, you know, I don't know.
He's not only, I don't need to put it on the podcast either, but I've been to a lot of people like to watch it though.
Yeah.
I mean, I think it would be nice because you could be in a situation where they're not constrained by time.
If you got somebody else that was sane.
Yeah.
That had a different viewpoint on this area of the thing where you could actually discuss and maybe make some mutual forward progress
between, you know, coming to better ideas or more mutually agreed upon ideas that might be nice.
You are on Instagram at Dan Crenshaw TX, which is for Texas echo.
In case you didn't know that.
Facebook, Dan Crenshaw, at Dan Crenshaw, and you also have your website, which is Crenshaw for Congress.
Is that where the book is as well?
Or no.
No.
That's the book.
The book is Dan Crenshaw book.com.
Got it.
You're like your branding.
It's just like mine.
My name.
Yeah.
That's the book.
Exactly.
Did I miss anything as far as like all this stuff as far as getting in touch with you and all that?
No.
I mean, it's easy to find me on social media.
You have to keep in mind.
Here's some annoyances about how my social media works.
On Instagram, I have one account.
Okay.
It's my personal account.
It's not really official.
It's not really campaign.
But the way the rules work, you have to generally differentiate between a official and
campaign, which is why there's two Facebook accounts, which is why there's two Twitter accounts.
And you have to follow all of them to get all the information.
Instagram, if you're an Instagram user, it's a little easier for you.
I just, because I control that's my personal account.
And that's why you just have to search for me a couple times and then follow both.
That's the only thing I would add.
Got it.
Now, Dan, I know you're doing a lot for America, which is definitely appreciated.
But I want you to know that we're doing our part over here as well in the private sector.
We're working hard to make people better.
Yes.
To make the economy better.
And to rebuild the foundation of America, on at least one foundation of America, and that is self-reliance and our ability to create and build the best products in the world.
100% American made.
But I say 100% American made.
Yes.
Yeah.
100% American made.
In three years, I think it's three years.
We've gone from eight employees to 80.
We are just getting warmed up.
A little company up in Maine.
Yes.
My home state, my home region, I should say.
I'm a New Englander.
Yeah.
Because I got time in Connecticut and Maine.
But I can acclaim it a little bit.
My home record is Maine.
Yes, you can claim it.
So up there, we got a little factory.
That's true.
We got a little something called a origin Maine.
Tell us about a deco Charles.
Okay.
Oh, well.
Oh, by the way, we are getting softer.
By the way.
I think it's a good idea.
Generally speaking, as a group, we are all getting softer.
That's why generation after generation.
They say, oh, my generation was harder than this new generation.
That's why they always say it.
You're saying it factually.
It's factually.
And this is why generally speaking, as true individuals,
there's variations in individuals for sure.
And even little micro groups for sure,
variation.
But there's why technology, the whole reason for technology is to solve our problems.
Just to make things easier.
Make everything easier, exactly right.
And I'd say I like to look not like to, but I look at it as to solve our problems,
which is making things easier for sure.
So even like the caveman, right, when they invented the wheel,
all these softies, they got the wheel now.
Now, assume saying, because before that generation,
we had to carry stuff.
I mean, they're objectively harder.
I think objectively speaking.
I think so.
It's not a bad thing that we've made things easier.
But right, you have to art.
It was just kind of the whole point of the chapter.
Do something hard.
You have to make up for that.
Yeah, you have to make up for that.
Art officially, yeah, hardening your own life.
Oh, yeah.
And that's why this is like your book is good.
That's why what you say is good is because, right, we can't,
this is a wave, a wave of just easiness coming on us.
There's no stopping it.
But individually, we can kind of like fight against,
not necessarily the wave, but the results of the wave.
Yeah, I'm saying.
You can do something hard.
Yeah.
So what you get, though, what you will get inevitably is everyone with all
their problem solved.
And we're always looking for these little issues.
Yeah.
Because that's how, right, that's nature.
So now it's like, hey, that's some injustice right there.
Yeah, it's a lot, it's a lot harder to complain about the injustice of your wife,
and your neighborhood, not being as strong as it's if you don't got food on your
plate.
Right.
And it's, you don't have to think about like your kids know, right?
Where it's like, oh, yeah, they got to wear helmets now.
So you can say, hey, you guys got to wear seat belts now.
So I get into like a 1965 something.
Yeah.
Right.
You're going to die in that thing.
It seems like it's the same, but that was just how bad that.
Yeah.
Now getting your 2020, whatever Tesla and probably you can fall asleep behind the wheel.
You're safe.
Yeah.
They've got you.
No problem exactly.
Right.
All your problems solved.
So that's how, you know, it's like, you know, all these groups of people,
like, very small groups of people, but they're super loud because they can be now.
That's just how like back in the day you could not out hunting down elk for the bow and arrow.
Yeah.
And not to mention the technology allows all this, you know, so yeah, and they're louder
whatever, but you make a good point where it's like, yeah, if you go out and look for all these
issues, it's like, it's hard to find them.
But you're how you say like Ben Shapiro and Dan, they're in ground zero.
Oh, the ground man can't is that.
That is better ground.
Yeah.
So it's going to seem pretty bad.
On the last, yes.
So yes, uh, keep up good fight against the weight of wealth.
Doing hard things.
What hard things you got for us?
Echo Charles, what can we do?
Gigiatsu, hard daily hard hardships.
Oh, day daily hardships.
You know, working out fitness, Gigiatsu and I wasn't going to say fashion, but that's more
you're a shoe.
That's hard for you.
You see, okay.
Anyway, so when we do Gigiatsu, what are we doing?
Gigi, we don't Gigi, we don't know Gigi.
No Gigi, if you get a Gigi, get an origin Gigi, for all the reasons you mentioned.
Yeah.
We'll get you up to the factory up in Maine, Dan.
You got to go check it out.
It's, um, it's awesome.
It's awesome.
We literally brought the last, about the last loom in Lewiston, Maine from a 500,000 square
foot of abandoned factory that hadn't been used in 20 years and all the other hundreds and
hundreds of looms from that factory, sent overseas.
We're bringing it back.
We had one loom.
Now I think we got four looms.
We're, we're, we're bringing it back.
And, uh, and, you know, the folks up there, these are folks that their industry was
taken away from them.
Their industry was sold overseas.
And now they're back.
Craftsman, crafts, women.
Sowing, making boots, making jeans, all in America from, and every, like every single
part of those jeans is American.
Yeah.
This is such an important, I want to bring it to a little bit of politics and how I view this
and the need to, to embrace some sense of American economic nationalism, which we've
lost over time.
And the rise of Trump, when people ask about how the Republican party has changed under Trump,
what they're, it's usually a disingenuous question.
What they want you to say is that Republicans are racist, right?
That's really what they're insinuating when they ask that question or that they're more racist now.
That's not true.
But there is some change.
And this, this drive towards a, to, to a conversation about economic nationalism is actually part of that change.
And it's been interesting to watch.
And I think it's a necessary change.
Because what Trump got was a lot of democrat voters who,
maybe voted, democrat their whole life, but they're part of a union, culturally speaking,
they identify a hell of a lot more with me than they do AOC.
Okay.
So they started voting based on that.
But also, Trump finally talked about some things they were concerned about, which was like,
China, okay, China, taking advantage of us, NAFTA, taking advantage of us.
And the reality is that's, that's a, that's a nuanced conversation.
It's not, it's not, it's different for every factory to be honest.
It's, sometimes it's the business itself that sucked.
Sometimes it is Chinese dumping that occurred.
All right.
Sometimes it, it's just, it's a mix of things.
But Republicans for too long, it here to, to a, to a highly stringent free market economy,
dogmatic approach, which said,
if another country can make it cheaper, they should make it.
All right. That's just, that's economics 101, we're done.
No more thinking about it.
Well, that's, that's not that simple.
Like, there's winners and losers here, just because like tomatoes are now five cents cheaper for everybody,
doesn't mean that we're all better off.
You know, we've thousands of farmers that no longer make tomatoes.
Also, we don't make tomatoes.
And now, by the way, again, let's bring back some coronavirus,
we've got a real conversation in this country to have about medical device,
manufacturing and supply lines of our medical industry.
And computer industry and everything else.
Like, there is benefit, even if it costs us more, there is benefit to having that here in America.
It's a real benefit, not just the job, the manufacturing jobs are certainly some of those benefits,
but there's a national security reason as well.
And it's about time we have a more honest conversation about that as Republicans.
Democrats will just be against Trump no matter what.
So like, because they don't, they're not really principled in this.
They're mostly about seeking power for the sake of the revolution.
And I could go way back into that again.
But, and so, you know, I, we just, I think that's an interesting point.
Is, is where I want to end that.
And so I love what you guys are doing.
I guess is what I'm really trying to say.
Yeah, well, it's, and you know, we got this right now.
Again, you're talking coronavirus.
We got 100% American supply chain.
So zero impact.
Zero impact. It's, it's just, it's, it's awesome.
And yeah, you're talking about the, the Chinese are making a bunch of the, what 95% of the pharmaceuticals are something crazy.
There's crazy number like that.
Yeah.
That's not okay.
And yeah, if you save five cents on something, that's not okay when something happens.
Even if it was, even if it was just a natural disaster that, that caused problems over there.
You know, no, no political anything.
That's a real problem.
And to, to have single source for life, life saving capabilities, that's a bad plan.
And hopefully we look back at this coronavirus and we say, hey, I'm glad we got a heads up.
I'm glad we got a free lesson.
Relatively cheap lessons learned about this.
So anyways, up in Maine, doing it.
We're doing it.
We're doing it right now.
We've been doing it.
And we're going to continue to grow.
We're going to continue to get out the best products.
We're going to do that.
We're going to continue to grow.
So we can supplement to supplementation as as aquatiles like to call it.
True.
From time to time.
So for supplementation, what?
Join supplement.
Very important.
By the way, yeah.
Join.
I should probably take some of this.
Yeah.
I brought what you can do like if you joins don't work.
Yeah, not much.
Just get new ones.
Yeah.
Yep, there's that technology.
By the way, yeah.
Also.
Moq.
It's more of a dessert.
It's a dessert that happens to have a bunch of protein in it,
and probiotics, and it has no sugar
and it's super healthy and it tastes delicious.
Technology, it's skeptical of the delicious part.
That's what's crazy.
I love dessert.
That's what has got so many people,
officially on the malt train.
I train so much dessert.
I will send you what flavor of these flavors,
chocolate, vanilla, mint chocolate chip,
which is my personal favorite.
Reces peanut butter cup, and I know I can't call it that,
but that's what it tastes like.
Peanut butter chocolate, what's that?
Peanut butter chocolate.
I'll pick the peanut butter chocolate.
And then here's the one that's kind of the creeper,
or the, what's it called?
Creep?
No, the sleeper.
The sleeper is strawberry.
So did you ever have strawberry quick when you were a kid?
Yeah.
Did you write it?
Yes.
Okay, I'm not kidding.
I'm not kidding.
Strawberry moch tastes better than strawberry quick.
No.
I'm telling you like a competitive,
is it a liquid way?
Can we back, because my preference for flavor
does depend on the substance that we have.
Yeah, it's like a milk shake.
Milk shake, it's like a milk shake.
It's like a milk shake or a chocolate milk or a,
or a nest is quick.
Okay.
Well, you can make the strawberry.
What?
You can make pink pink.
You can put milk in pretty much anything.
Okay, okay, so based on the fact that it's more like a milk shake,
then I would, yeah, then I would say not the peanut butter.
I do like peanut butter milk shake,
but that's more of an ice cream than I'm, I'm favorite.
Okay.
So can we have milk ice cream?
Is that a thing?
We have things in process for the milk ice cream.
And did you have some at camp?
Yes, sir.
Okay, so yeah, we have milk ice cream.
We need to move forward on an logistics.
That's a heavy logistics.
You know, you're talking about shipping frozen fruits, et cetera.
So we're moving in that direction.
We're not there yet.
We're working on it.
Gotcha.
It's, we have milk bars coming, which,
what's it get totally ridiculous, totally ridiculous.
I'm changing your stuff.
So strawberry then.
Yeah, no, we'll get to the line.
Yeah, the whole deal of the whole line.
So you'll just be, you'll be,
sometimes you're going to be in the woods for men,
sometimes you're going to be in the woods for, you know,
strawberry, I've got to say two.
Oh yeah, those milk bars, you're going to,
it's funny because, you know,
how kids are the kind of the litmus test, you know, like,
if you give the kid like,
let's say back in the day, right?
You got your diet, shake.
And then it's like kids to get out.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
And you just give it to the kid,
the kids like, brought him like this.
Like, you know, I, I dig it or whatever.
They don't just don't like.
So my, and I have a video of this, where my son,
three, by the way, which is a solid little test group.
Get a good experiment.
Yeah, yeah.
Cause he doesn't have morals or nothing like that.
So he's just, he'll tell you the truth.
Yeah, that's what I mean.
Like he didn't care about your feelings or whatever.
So yeah, I have a video of him
champion a moq bar.
Yeah.
I didn't give him a moq bar.
And he's like, oh yeah, he just chucked the chocolate bar,
whatever.
And I was like, what are you eating?
And he's like, yeah, frozen chocolate bar.
And here's the thing, I put those in the freezer to hide them.
And he went in there, shake it.
Shake it down.
With motivation, obviously, you're seeing same taste buds.
Is the number one motivating factor in this case.
Yeah.
Anyway, so that was the test.
That's the most bar though.
I don't want to get too ahead of myself.
Yeah, yeah.
We'll stick with the moq for now.
All right, so yes.
And by the way, all those things, the supplementation,
the drinks, everything is available at originmain.com.
Also, at vitamin shop nationwide.
There you go.
Also, we will be listing Tans Book for easy availability,
fortitude on our website, joccompancass.com, good click.
On the book section on the top menu,
we have a book section there.
That's by episode.
So this episode, boom, you'll see.
See Tans Book there.
Anyway, you can get it there.
Also, it's a store called jockel store.
So you go to jockelstore.com.
Similar to Dans Book or what was it called?
42 book.com.
Danscranchal book.com.
Yeah, yeah.
So it's the simplicity, same jockel store to store from jockel.
Jockel store, right?
Duckcom.
Anyway, this is where you can get what shirts, hats, hoodies,
many garments representative of the path.
The subscribe to the podcast if you haven't already,
which if you haven't already, you might want to just do
a full-on sort of system's check of your whole life.
Otherwise, just subscribe, check out Dans podcast,
which is called Hold These Truths.
Or you can just search for Dancranchonic pops up.
Don't forget about the grounded podcast
where we talk about the most important things in life.
All kind of related to another thing in life called jiu-jitsu.
War your kid podcast.
We're going to have one of Dancranchonic, by the way.
So your kids can figure out how they want to be
directed down the path.
And don't forget about that War Your Kid soap
from IrishOach Ranch.com.
Black soap, which is magically turns to cladliness on your body.
Yep, counterintuitive for sure.
It's called, yes, Dan.
Question.
I've black toothed, this.
Okay, well, we're going to activate a charcoal.
Activated charcoal.
And it helps some sort of thing, right?
I don't know what it does.
Yes, but we know it's kind of looks cool.
It stains my towels.
We know that it looks cool.
So, but it feels cleaner.
Yeah.
I like it.
So we got soap that helps to kill germs bacteria.
Does not stick to the virus.
Oh, that.
Yeah.
And that soap is called killer soap.
And what that will do, it will help you and your family
stay clean.
Yeah.
See, that's got a YouTube channel.
Yes.
Video version of this podcast.
You can see what Dan Crenschall looks like.
Good, good looking guy.
Really good looking.
You know, cool.
I patch new.
I patch by the way.
It's new.
Yeah.
Just unveiled this one.
Blow him.
You want to see what that looks like.
We have a YouTube channel on YouTube.com, et cetera.
You understand.
Also some excerpts on there by the way.
If you don't want to watch the whole thing, if you don't want to forward to your
friend to go, hey, check out what echo
you're going to tell us about this.
And then they send him a four hour.
What is it?
Yeah, four hour video.
Video.
The whole thing.
You're part of the problem.
That part of your life.
We got psychological warfare on MP3 platforms.
You're a little psychological here.
You can get it.
We got flip side canvas Dakota Meyer, my brother, making cool things to hang on your wall.
We got a bunch of books.
We got fortitude by Dan Crenschall.
We got leadership strategy in tactics, field manual.
We got the way the warrior kid series.
We got Mikey in the dragon.
We got discipline.
He goes freedom field manual.
We got extreme ownership of the dichotomy and leadership.
Get every single one of those books.
Yeah, get them, yeah.
Excellent front leadership consultancy.
What we do is solve problems through leadership.
Go to echelonfront.com if you need help at your business team corporation.
We got your covered.
EF online is online training for leadership interactive.
Check that out.
2020 Orlando, May 7th, the eighth.
So sure about that one.
We may be getting some, what do you think Dan, what do you think the chances are?
900 people.
I mean, experts think, you know, this is a change in America life that will last a month
or two.
And then we'll be on the downtrend.
We can look at the numbers coming out of China and South Korea as perhaps a guide
as to how the decrease in cases happens.
Hopefully, we don't even reach the peaks that they did get to be seen.
Plus we got social distancing slowing down the curve.
Echoing.
Basically, if you hang around echo, echo thinks that he's sort of a national hero right now
because he's not shaking people's hands.
He's sort of taken on, you know, you're talking about the typical hero.
I think we had echo Charles over there.
He's sacrificing his own hugs.
His own hugs.
So I'm not even, yeah.
It's keeping it real.
Look, if Orlando doesn't go down, we'll keep you posted.
But then it's going to be Phoenix Arizona, September 16th and 17th Dallas, Texas, December
3rd and 4th.
And of course, we have EF overwatch and EF Legion.
If you need personnel inside your business that understand the principles that we talk
about all the time, that we wrote about go to EF overwatch.com for executive leadership
from the military.
Go to EF Legion.com for frontline troops and leaders.
That's what we do.
And if you still want to interact with us some more, which is just getting kind of crazy.
I mean, it's been a long time.
There's a lot of hours.
But if you need more, then we are on the in-depth.
Like I said, Dan is on Twitter and on Instagram at Dan Crenshaw, TX for Texas Facebook, Dan
Crenshaw website, Dan Crenshaw for Congress, echoing out on Twitter on Instagram and
on good old VT.
Okay.
Echoes at Echo Charles and I am at Jocquark.
Echo, any closing thoughts?
No, good to see Dan Crenshaw again.
This time, this time as an esteemed member of the Steeamed Steeamed Steeamed.
Big time esteemed, yeah.
It's a lovely word.
I really appreciate it.
It's been fun.
Yeah.
A little longer than we thought.
It happened.
We got a lot to say.
Man.
Some tangential things.
But all good.
Thanks for coming back on.
Thanks for sharing your life story and your lessons.
I'm not just here, but in the book and I know people are going to thank you for the book.
I am going to thank you and everyone.
Thanks you for your service and your sacrifice.
Not only on the battlefield, but now you're fighting a different kind of battle.
You know, you and I talk offline.
I told you twice once on the phone and once when you showed up here, I'm really glad that
you have your job.
I have mine.
Your job is not one that I would want and not fun, but you're doing it for the right
reasons.
And I think everyone appreciates the fact that you're fighting a battle for the future
of America.
So that America remains now and forever.
The land of the free and the home of the brave.
And the same goes to the rest of our service men and women out there.
Film is not free and someone has to hold the line.
And it is all of you soldiers, sailors, airmen, and marines out there who keep evil and
darkness at bay.
And we thank you for that.
And the same thing goes to our police and law enforcement and firefighters and paramedics
and EMTs and dispatchers and correctional officers and board of patrol and secret service.
Same thing.
Freedom isn't free.
It takes sacrifice and thanks to all of you for what you do every day.
To take care of us and keep our country free and to everyone else out there.
Life is a struggle.
It's a challenge.
It's suffering.
And you're not always going to win.
But even when you don't win, as Dan says, don't quit.
Don't give up.
Don't be a victim.
Don't take the easy path.
Don't squander this life.
Instead live with fortitude.
By getting up every day, then getting after it.
And until next time, this is Dan Crenshaw and Echo and Jocco out.